

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with glucose transporter type 1 deficiency syndrome (Glut1-DS), the following evaluations are recommended: EEG (pre-prandial and post-prandial tracings) Brain imaging, including FDG-PET in selected individuals Neuropsychological assessment Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Ketogenic diet. Diffusion of ketone bodies across the blood-brain barrier is facilitated by the monocarboxylic transporter 1(MCT1). The ketogenic diet, introduced as a treatment for Glut1-DS in 1991, primarily provides an alternative fuel for brain metabolism. The ketogenic diet creates chronic ketosis by largely replacing carbohydrates and proteins with lipids in varying ratios. Experience over the past two decades indicates that the ketogenic diet is well tolerated in most cases and is highly effective in controlling the seizures and improving gait disturbance. Of note, seizures may recur even with good dietary compliance [Klepper et al 2005]. Even when seizures are controlled, affected individuals may continue to have neurobehavioral deficits involving cognition and social adaptive behavior [Klepper et al 2002]. In the authors’ experience, the neurologic outcome is influenced by the age at which treatment is initiated: affected individuals treated at a younger age have a better outcome [Alter et al 2015]. Note: Because the ketogenic diet is deficient in L-carnitine, a co-factor that is essential for the metabolism of fats, dietary supplementation with 50 mg/kg/day of L-carnitine is recommended [De Vivo et al 1998]. Affected individuals develop a mild compensated metabolic acidosis when ketotic. Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) are generally ineffective or afford only limited improvement in the absence of a ketogenic diet. Certain AEDs may be relatively contraindicated as adjunctive treatment in children on the ketogenic diet (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). Phenobarbital and valproic acid can inhibit Glut1 transport. Valproic acid may partially inhibit beta-oxidation of fatty acids. Acetazolamide, topiramate, and zonisamide inhibit carbonic anhydrase and may potentiate the metabolic acidosis. These agents also can cause kidney stones. Alpha-lipoic acid (thioctic acid) also has been shown to facilitate glucose transport in Glut4-dependent cultured skeletal muscle cells. Preliminary in vitro studies with Glut1 transport systems have shown similar results. Thus, alpha-lipoic acid supplements have been recommended, without supportive clinical evidence, as a treatment for Glut1-DS. Response has been modest at best; however, the dose taken by mouth may be insufficient to approximate experimental conditions [Kulikova-Schupak et al 2001].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Clinical observations suggest that early diagnosis and treatment with a ketogenic diet is associated with improved neurologic outcome by nourishing the immature brain during this critical period of growth and development [Alter et al 2015].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 For those who are treated with the ketogenic diet: L-carnitine supplementation to avoid carnitine deficiency Proper hydration and avoidance of carbonic anhydrase inhibitors to minimize likelihood of kidney stones. Avoid carbohydrate-containing foods, intravenous fluids, and medications that will interrupt the state of ketosis. Family care providers often need to serve as the “watch dogs” to intercept these indiscretions. Valproic acid treatment may be dangerous in individuals on a ketogenic diet because it increases the risk of a Reye-like illness. Additionally, valproic acid may inhibit glucose transport.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Blood ketone concentrations should be monitored daily, weekly or as needed to document the state of ketosis. A blood beta-hydroxybutyrate concentration of 3-5 mmol/L is recommended to insure a proper ketotic state. Urinary measurement of ketonuria is only qualitative, and may be falsely reassuring as a strongly positive urine test for ketones may correlate with hypoketonemia. Blood measurement of ketone concentration is the preferred method.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 The following should be avoided: Barbiturates. Generally, children with infantile-onset seizures are treated with phenobarbital, the most commonly used antiepileptic drug in this age group. In vitro studies indicate that barbiturates aggravate the Glut1 transport defect in erythrocytes of individuals with Glut1-DS [Klepper et al 1999a]. On occasion, parents have reported that phenobarbital did not improve their child’s seizure control or may have worsened their child's clinical condition. Methylxanthines (e.g., caffeine), which are known to inhibit transport of glucose by Glut1 [Ho et al 2001b], also have been reported to worsen the clinical state of individuals with Glut1-DS [Brockmann et al 2001]. Thus, it is advisable for affected individuals to avoid coffee and other caffeinated beverages. Valproic acid. The following studies suggest that valproic acid effects in vitro are mixed and the clinical consequences of valproic acid usage in patients with Glut1-DS cannot be predicted. Valproic acid inhibited Glut1 transport activity in normal and Glut1-deficient erythrocytes by 20%-30%. In primary astrocytes as well as in normal and Glut1-deficient fibroblasts, sodium valproate inhibited glucose transport by 20%-40%, accompanied by an up to 60% down-regulation of GLUT1 mRNA expression [Wong et al 2005]. A study using cultured astrocytes from the Glut1-DS mouse model showed an upregulation of Glut1 activity at lower valproic acid concentrations presumably from the valproic acid associated inhibition of histone deacetylase activity [Kim et al 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk newborns, infants, and other relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives if the pathogenic variant in the family is known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Triheptanoin is a specially designed synthetic triglyceride compound of three, seven-carbon (C7) fatty acids intended to provide affected individuals with the medium-length, odd-chain, fatty-acid heptanoate. Triheptanoin is metabolized rapidly in the liver to form a series of energy-containing metabolites, including heptanoate, which is further metabolized to 4-carbon (C4) and 5-carbon (C5) ketone bodies. Ketone bodies cross the blood-brain barrier via the monocarboxylate transporter, bypassing the deficient Glut1 transporter and providing alternative energy sources to the brain. The metabolites also have the ability to resupply intermediates of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle (i.e., anaplerosis) . A pilot study of the effects of ingestion of triheptanoin as a dietary supplement in individuals with Glut1 deﬁciency was conducted and the preliminary results of this trial showed increased oxygen cerebral metabolic rate (CMRO2), decreased seizures, and improved neuropsychological performance [Pascual et al 2014]. A Phase II randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study of the triheptanoin effects in those with Glut1-DS is currently enrolling affected persons who are currently not fully compliant with the ketogenic diet and continue to have seizures. The primary efficacy objective is reduction in seizure frequency. Gene therapy. Murine Glut1 was packaged into adeno-associated virus 9 (AAV9) and systemically introduced into a neonatal mouse model of Glut1 deficiency. Injected mutant mice and relevant controls were assessed during adult life. In AAV9-Glut1 treated mutants, Glut1 RNA and protein levels rose, CSF glucose levels were restored, brain size was normalized and motor defects corrected [Monani et al 2014]. These results provide important proof-of-concept data of the therapeutic effects of restoring Glut1protein function in Glut1-DS and represent an important step toward finding a disease-modifying treatment for the human disease. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.