

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Phelan-McDermid syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: A complete physical and neurologic examination Determination of head circumference, height, weight, and other anthropometric measurements A medical history, focusing on feeding problems, increased incidence of infection, evidence of kidney malfunction and/or gastroesophageal reflux, and symptoms of increased intracranial pressure Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for ureteral reflux, dysplastic kidney, multicystic kidneys, and other renal problems Liver function tests may be warranted given that two individuals had autoimmune hepatitis and liver failure [Tufano et al 2009, Bartsch et al 2010] Brain imaging studies (MRI, CT scan) in individuals with microcephaly and in individuals with symptoms suggestive of increased intracranial pressure from arachnoid cysts, including irritability, incessant crying, severe headache, cyclic vomiting, and seizures Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation to assess motor, cognitive, social, and vocational skills Comprehensive speech/language evaluation including an audiologic examination A clinical genetics consultation to discuss clinical manifestations, prognosis, natural history, therapies, and recurrence risks Neurologic consultation to evaluate delays secondary to hypotonia and to monitor acquisition of major milestones An EEG in individuals with seizures to help determine the appropriate antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). An EEG may also be used to detect subclinical seizure activity. Evaluation of feeding problems (usually consisting of swallowing or sucking difficulties) by a feeding specialist and/or occupational therapist and speech pathologist Evaluation of a child with autistic-like features by a child development specialist to identify early intervention programs to meet the child's developmental needs and to minimize atypical behaviors such as tactile defensiveness, anxiety, and self-stimulation Evaluation for hypothyroidism in individuals who experience changes in behavior including lethargy, decreased activity, cognitive regression, and loss of coordination Evaluation by an audiologist experienced in testing severely delayed children if hearing deficits are suspected because of recurrent ear infections and lack of expressive speech Ophthalmologic examination in individuals with strabismus or other indications of visual impairment; assessment of cortical visual impairment by a team including physical therapists, occupational therapists, orientation and mobility specialists, pediatric neurologists, and pediatric ophthalmologists Sleep study to evaluate for sleep apnea if sleep disturbance is present

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment includes the following: Regular professional dental hygiene, routine brushing, and fluoride treatment Oral-motor therapy to alleviate chewing and swallowing problems Consultation with a pediatric orthodontist regarding malocclusion and need for orthodontic intervention Routine protocols to alleviate sleep apnea. If other sleep disturbances are present, establishing a bedtime routine can calm and soothe the child. Melatonin has been used to treat insomnia in children with autism spectrum disorders with 85% of parents reporting improved or normal sleep [Andersen et al 2008]. Although no controlled studies have been performed in Phelan-McDermid syndrome, melatonin treatment has been used to improve sleep in some children. Tympanostomy tube placement for recurrent ear infections. If hearing is impaired, management with hearing aids should be considered. Resolution of cardiac, renal, respiratory, immunologic, thyroid, and other medical issues according to standard protocols Surgical removal of ingrown toenails to prevent infection Use of pressure stockings and elevation of the foot of the bed for lymphedema. Early intervention programs, intensive physical and occupational therapies, adaptive exercise and sports programs, and other therapies to improve coordination and strength Therapies to improve verbal and nonverbal communication because perceptive language is often more advanced than expressive language. Sign language, picture exchange systems, and computer touch screens may augment communication. Educational programming directed to the specific disabilities identified Walkers or other assistive walking devices Nutritional assessment for individuals with persistent gastroesophageal reflux (GER) and/or cyclic vomiting. GER may be treated in infants by thickening formula, smaller feedings, and positioning, and in older children by avoiding spicy food and refraining from eating within two to three hours of bed time. In some cases, medication is required to control GER. In the most persistent cases, surgery (fundoplication) may be required. As in the general population, medication as indicated to help reduce hyperactivity, anxiety, and self-stimulatory behavior Intravenous fluids to prevent dehydration in individuals with recurrent vomiting; neurologic evaluation to assess cyclic vomiting, particularly to address issues of increased intracranial pressure. If increased intracranial pressure is caused by an arachnoid cyst, surgery may be warranted. Vigilance by parents or caregivers in monitoring children, particularly those who can walk or run independently, as children may be impulsive and unaware of the consequences of their behavior

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Ongoing pediatric care with regular immunizations Evaluation by a neurologist for changes in behavior or regression of skills Monitoring for symptoms (e.g., vomiting, incessant crying, irritability, severe headaches) that may indicate increased intracranial pressure secondary to a subarachnoid cyst Routine monitoring of cardiac abnormalities Monitoring for lymphedema that may occur in teenage or adult years; in severe cases, monitoring by a vascular surgeon Routine dental examinations to monitor problems such as malocclusion, crowding, and accelerated tooth decay caused by poor enamel formation attributable to recurrent antibiotic therapy, acid reflux, and extended use of bottle feeding Ophthalmologic examination at routine intervals by a specialist trained in evaluating individuals with developmental delay

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Exposure to high temperatures and extended periods in the sun should be avoided because individuals with 22q13.3 deletion have reduced perspiration and tend to overheat easily.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Intranasal insulin (INIT).
Schmidt et al [2009] reported improved motor skills, cognition, and behavior in five of six children with Phelan-McDermid syndrome given INIT. Risperidone.
Pasini et al [2010] reported that low-dose risperidone treatment improved behavior, mood, and sleep in an 18-year-old female with Phelan-McDermid syndrome. Risperidone has been shown to exert a dose-dependent effect on glutamate receptors in animal models. These authors suggest that the therapeutic effects they observed may be related to the dose-dependent effects on a subset of glutamate receptors altered by SHANK3 haploinsufficiency. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.