http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/gr_22q11deletion

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



Clinical practice guidelines for the evaluation and treatment of individuals with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome have been published [Bassett et al 2011] (full text).

To establish the extent of disease and the needs of an individual diagnosed with 22q11.2DS, the following evaluations are recommended (if not performed as part of the evaluation that led to the diagnosis):

A baseline cardiac evaluation by a cardiologist that includes a chest x-ray, ECG, and echocardiogram; a chest MRI may be required if a vascular ring is suspected.

Measurement of serum ionized calcium concentration and intact parathyroid hormone level to assess for hypoparathyroidism, followed by a formal endocrinology evaluation if abnormal

TSH level

Complete blood cell count with differential. A low absolute lymphocyte count necessitates evaluation of T- and B-cell subsets and referral to an immunologist.

Immunologic evaluation, which may include flow cytometry, immunoglobulins, and T-cell function

Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for structural renal defects

Consideration of ophthalmology evaluation

Audiology evaluation

Chest x-ray to evaluate for thoracic vertebral anomalies

Cervical spine films (six views: flexion, extension, AP, lateral, open mouth, skull base) in all individuals over age four years (the age that the cervical spine becomes better ossified)

Clinical evaluation of the palate to screen for palatal anomalies which may affect feeding and speech development

Assessment for possible feeding problems including significant gastroesophageal reflux; difficulty with sucking/swallowing, advancing feeds, addition of textured foods; vomiting and constipation

Speech and language assessment by age one year given that almost all children with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome have delay in emergence of language and would benefit from early intervention strategies. In addition, such an evaluation aids in the diagnosis of a palatal abnormality/VPI.

As needed:

Evaluation of children with short stature (height below the 2nd percentile) by an endocrinologist for possible growth hormone deficiency

Evaluation by a psychologist or psychiatrist of any person with evidence of anxiety, mood disorder, behavioral differences, or frank psychosis

Evaluation by a hematologist of any person with a history of a bruising/bleeding disorder

Treatment of Manifestations



Depending on the age and presenting problems of the individual with the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, a multidisciplinary evaluation involving healthcare providers from the following specialties is often necessary: allergy, audiology, cardiology, cardiac surgery, child development / psychology, dental, endocrine, ENT, feeding, gastroenterology, general pediatrics, general surgery, immunology, clinical genetics, neurology, neurosurgery, ophthalmology, orthopedics, otolaryngology, plastic surgery, psychiatry, pulmonary, rheumatology, speech, and urology.

Low serum calcium concentration warrants calcium supplementation in a standard manner and, when possible, referral to an endocrinologist/nephrologist because of the increased risk of renal calculi in individuals on long-term calcium supplementation.

Feeding difficulties should be evaluated by a gastroenterologist to assess for possible structural abnormalities such as intestinal malrotation/nonrotation, Hirschsprung disease, and late-onset diaphragmatic hernia [McDonald-McGinn et al 2004].

Strategies for addressing feeding difficulties include: modification of spoon placement when eating; treatment for gastroesophageal reflux with acid blockade, prokinetic agents, postural therapy; and medication to treat gastrointestinal dysmotility and to facilitate bowel evacuation [Dinulos & Graf 1998, Eicher et al 2000].

Early intervention (occupational therapy, physical therapy) and speech therapy/the introduction of sign language should be instituted by age one year or at presentation in childhood because of the high risk for motor, cognitive, speech, and language delay. Later, educational and behavioral therapy are often warranted.

Growth hormone deficiency, if present, should be treated as in the general population.

Immune deficiency generally requires no specific intervention except treating infections aggressively. Rarely, prophylactic antibiotics, IVIG therapy, or thymic transplantation are required.

Early diagnosis and early intervention for psychiatric illnesses improve long-term prognosis in individuals with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder [Clarke & O’Callaghan 2003] and other disorders including autism, anxiety, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder/attention deficit disorder (ADHD/ADD) [Vorstman et al 2006, Bassett et al 2011].

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Infants with lymphocyte abnormalities should not be immunized with live vaccines (i.e., oral polio, MMR). Their immune status should be reevaluated in childhood before receiving live vaccines.

Antibody studies to assess results of immunizations are warranted.

Irradiated blood products are recommended until normalization of the immune system can be confirmed.

Serum ionized calcium concentration should be measured pre- and postoperatively to avoid hypocalcemic seizures due to physical stress.

Consider the following:

Assessment of carotid arteries prior to surgical procedures involving the pharynx

Possible effects on speech prior to adenoidectomy

Assessment of cervical spine anomalies prior to hyperextension of the neck during surgical procedures/athletic pursuits, such as tumbling

Pre- and postoperative sleep studies when performing pharyngeal procedures

Assessment of platelet volume and function prior to surgical procedures

Surveillance



Affected individuals require follow up as needed on a "system by system" basis:

Monitoring for hypocalcemia, including ionized calcium level every three to six months in infancy, every five years through childhood, and every one to two years thereafter

Monitoring of calcium levels preoperatively and postoperatively, and regularly during pregnancy

Thyroid studies annually

Reevaluation of immunologic status between age nine and 12 months; consideration of repeat immunologic evaluation prior to any live virus vaccine

Annual complete blood count and differential

Repeat ophthalmologic evaluation between age one and five years, or as needed based on symptoms

Evaluation of nasal speech quality after language emersion to screen for VPI

Repeat audiology evaluation in infancy and prior to school enrollment

Routine surveillance for the development of scoliosis

Routine dental care with consideration of sealants in those individuals with enamel hypoplasia/increased incidence of caries

Regular developmental assessments benefit the child and assist the school in providing appropriate remediation.

Periodic reevaluation by a clinical geneticist can apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Carbonated drinks and alcohol consumption may exacerbate hypocalcemia. Caffeine intake may contribute to or worsen anxiety.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Pregnant women must be monitored medically, taking into account any preexisting conditions including congenital heart disease, scoliosis, and asthma. Additional surveillance should include calcium, thyroid, and platelet levels. In addition, changes in mental status/behavior should be referred for immediate evaluation by a mental health care provider.

A fetus at high risk of having the condition should undergo a level II ultrasound with fetal echocardiogram to evaluate for the following anomalies : congenital heart disease; airway, palate, swallowing, and gastrointestinal differences possibly leading to polyhydramnios (congenital diaphragmatic hernia, tracheoesophageal fistula, subglottic stenosis, vascular ring, laryngeal web, and cleft palate/cleft lip/palate); renal anomalies; skeletal differences such as club foot and craniosynostosis; and umbilical and inguinal hernia.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.