http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/gr_3ms

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with 3-M syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment of joint mobility by physical examination Assessment of gonadal function in pubertal males by physical examination and serum concentrations of FSH, LH, and testosterone Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 The predominant management issues are ultimate adult stature and growth: Surgical bone lengthening may be an option for some. Adaptive aids for people with short stature are appropriate. Significant joint laxity should prompt orthopedic evaluation and measures to control the development of arthritis. Males with 3-M syndrome should be referred for endocrinologic evaluation regarding gonadal function at puberty. Treatment with growth hormone is indicated in the presence of documented growth hormone deficiency, but treatment of children with normal serum concentration of growth hormone is experimental. GH treatment should be carried out in a center with experience in managing growth disorders. Note: (1) Although most children with 3-M syndrome are evaluated for growth hormone deficiency, only one individual has been reported with an incomplete response to growth hormone (GH) stimulation, suggesting partial deficiency of GH [Miller et al 1975]. (2) Several individuals with short stature have been treated with exogenous GH without positive result [Miller et al 1975]. One report suggested that high-dosage GH treatment may be effective in 3-M syndrome [van der Wal et al 2001]. No obvious demonstration of growth hormone efficiency has been published to date [Huber et al 2011]. Hip dislocation has been reported, probably secondary to joint laxity [Badina et al 2011, Huber et al 2011].

Surveillance

 Monitoring of growth every six to 12 months on standard growth charts with special attention to growth velocity is recommended.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Early diagnosis of at-risk sibs allows for early orthopedic evaluation and measures to control the development of arthritis. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Management of pregnancy for affected women is identical to that for women with other forms of dwarfism or small stature, which is mainly to reduce the risk of premature birth. When a fetus is diagnosed prenatally (usually as the result of molecular genetic testing of an at-risk sib), no special surveillance during the pregnancy is warranted and no special issues regarding delivery have been identified.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.