

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a GRIN2A-related speech disorder and epilepsy, the following evaluations are recommended: Consultation with a speech and language pathologist Epilepsy consultation (if not done at the time of initial assessment) Sleep-deprived or sleep EEG with monitoring to capture slow-wave sleep (if not done at the time of initial assessment), as this is essential to diagnosing or excluding continuous spike-and-wave in sleep (CSWS). Neuropsychological assessment Hearing testing Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Speech/language deficits. Individuals with significant speech/language deficits may benefit from therapy by a speech pathologist. The therapies, which are individualized to the specific speech disorder, often include linguistic approaches and augmentative and alternative communication [Murray et al 2014]. Seizures, if present, should be treated with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). Many different AEDs may be effective, and no one medication has been demonstrated to be effective specifically for GRIN2A-related disorders. In one individual a good response to refractory epilepsy was achieved with topiramate [Venkateswaran et al 2014]. In one individual seizure burden was reduced with the addition of memantine; however, cognitive function did not improve [Pierson et al 2014]. Ketogenic diet and vagal nerve stimulator may also be considered in patients with refractory epilepsy. Treatment for epileptic encephalopathy with continuous spike-and-wave during sleep (ECSWS) and Landau-Kleffner syndrome (LKS) includes AEDs such as valproic acid, benzodiazepines, and corticosteroids. Sulthiame, ethosuximide, and levetiracetam may also be effective. Of note, intravenous immunoglobulin has not been proven to be efficacious [Striano & Capovilla 2013, Van Bogaert 2013]. Caregivers. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 AEDs are associated with possible adverse reactions (e.g., sedation, gastrointestinal symptoms, changes in appetite [increase or decrease], weight gain or loss, and rash) which vary according to the specific medication. Patients on AEDs should be monitored closely for adverse reactions and, if they develop, a change to an alternate AED should be considered. Corticosteroids are associated with a wide variety of possible adverse reactions, including weight gain with cushingoid appearance, skin thinning and purpura, alopecia, acne, posterior subscapular cataract, glaucoma, exophthalmos, cardiac arrhythmias, hypertension, gastrointestinal upset, pancreatitis, hypokalemia, osteoporosis, avascular necrosis, myopathy, behavioral/psychiatric disturbance, diabetes mellitus, adrenal insufficiency, and increased infection risk. If complications of corticosteroid therapy become of concern, gradual tapering and alternate therapy should be considered.

Surveillance

 Routine monitoring of speech and language by a speech pathologist should be considered for all children, particularly those diagnosed before reaching school age. Developmental surveillance should be conducted in all affected children.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 In individuals with epileptic encephalopathy with continuous spike-and-wave during sleep (ECSWS), phenytoin, barbiturates and carbamazepine should be avoided as they are rarely effective, may worsen the EEG, and have negative effects on neuropsychological outcomes [Striano & Capovilla 2013, Van Bogaert 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Using molecular genetic testing for the GRIN2A pathogenic variant found in an affected family member, it is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment. Of note, some individuals heterozygous for a GRIN2A pathogenic variant who have only relatively mild speech dysfunction may benefit from early evaluation and intervention by a speech and language pathologist. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.