http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/gsd3

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with glycogen storage disease type III (GSD III), the following are recommended: Liver ultrasound examination to determine the size of the liver and to identify adenomas if present Baseline electrocardiogram and echocardiogram Consultation with a biochemical geneticist

Treatment of Manifestations

 The mainstay of management of GSD III is a high-protein diet with cornstarch supplementation to maintain euglycemia. In infancy, feeds every three to four hours are recommended. Unlike the diet used to treat infants with GSD I, the diet used to treat infants with GSD III can include fructose and galactose, as individuals with GSD III can utilize these sugars; special formulas are not required. Toward the end of the first year of life, cornstarch is tolerated and can be used to prevent hypoglycemia. Initially one to three doses per day may be required with typical starting dose of 1 g/kg every six hours. The doses can be titrated based on the results of glucose and ketone monitoring. A protein intake of 3 g/kg is recommended as gluconeogenesis is intact and protein can be used as a source of glucose. For those who cannot make it through the night on cornstarch and protein, Glycosade® extended-release cornstarch can be used [Ross et al 2015]. A high-protein diet prevents breakdown of endogenous muscle protein in times of glucose need and preserves skeletal and cardiac muscles. Periods of suboptimal metabolic control can be identified by measuring blood glucose and blood ketone several times per month. Although hypoglycemia upon awakening is uncommon in older children and adults since counter-regulation can raise blood glucose concentrations, monitoring blood glucose concentrations between 2 to 4 AM can reveal periods of suboptimal control. Elevated ketones reflect poor metabolic control as ketones are produced when glucose is unavailable and instead fatty acid oxidation is used as a source of energy. Monitoring blood ketones upon awakening at least several times per month using a portable blood ketone meter is recommended; the goal is to maintain blood beta-OH-butyrate concentrations in the normal range (<0.3 mmol/L). Additionally, morning urine ketone measurements can be monitored with regular urine dipsticks to give an overview of overnight metabolic control. Existing skeletal and cardiac myopathies can be improved with high-protein diet and avoidance of excessive carbohydrate intake [Slonim et al 1982, Slonim et al 1984, Dagli et al 2009, Valayannopoulos et al 2011, Sentner et al 2012]. Titration of protein and cornstarch in the diet is the primary treatment for elevated cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations, which usually result from suboptimal metabolic control. Emergency protocol. An emergency protocol to avoid dangerous hypoglycemia should be established. An intravenous (IV) infusion of 10% dextrose with 0.5 normal saline administered at 1.5 times the maintenance rate should be given immediately on admission to the emergency room. Serum concentrations of electrolytes, glucose, and ketones should be monitored. Efforts should be made to correct ketosis as it can induce vomiting and worsen the catabolic state. Liver transplantation. In GSD III hepatic complications are not the main cause of morbidity. Also, modern treatment strategies and good metabolic control can prevent major complications. Liver transplantation should therefore be viewed as a treatment of last resort for individuals with GSD III. Liver transplantation will prevent hypoglycemia in both GSD IIIa and GSD IIIb; the muscular defect, however, will remain present in individuals with GSD IIIa. Because liver transplantation does not cure the heart and muscle problems and because transplantation has been associated with worsening myopathy and cardiomyopathy, liver transplantation is only indicated in affected individuals with severe hepatic cirrhosis, liver dysfunction, and/or hepatocellular carcinoma [Davis & Weinstein 2008].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Most of the primary manifestations of GSD III can be diminished or avoided with good metabolic (dietary) control. When euglycemia is maintained and ketosis is avoided, hepatomegaly regresses and other abnormal laboratory values (e.g., elevated AST and ALT, increased serum concentration of triglycerides) normalize or come close to baseline [Bernier et al 2008]. Myopathy and cardiomyopathy may be partially avoided by good dietary control. New evidence suggests that skeletal muscle metabolism is impaired during exercise in GSD III. Consumption of fructose or sucrose prior to exercise may improve exercise tolerance, but does not completely prevent exercise-induced damage [Preisler et al 2015].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Surgery. Persons with GSD III undergoing surgery should be admitted the night before the procedure and an IV infusion containing 10% dextrose started within two hours of the last cornstarch dose or the last meal. Glucose and ketone monitoring should continue overnight and during the procedure. IV dextrose infusion should not be stopped abruptly as dangerous hypoglycemia can occur from a hyperinsulinemic state. IV fluids need to be tapered slowly once optimal oral intake has been established and tolerated. Osteoporosis may occur in adults with GSD III. Good metabolic control leads to improved muscle strength and decreased ketosis. Bone mineralization is adversely affected in acidic environments. In contrast, improved muscle condition and strength increase bone mineralization. Supplementation with vitamin D and calcium is also recommended to augment bone mineralization.

Surveillance

 To identify periods of suboptimal metabolic control, blood glucose should be measured between 2 AM and 4 AM or urine ketones should be measured upon awakening at least several times per month. Hypoglycemia is uncommon in older children and adults upon awakening since counter-regulation can raise blood glucose concentrations; however, monitoring blood glucose concentrations at 2 to 4 AM can reveal periods of suboptimal control. Monitoring of blood ketones upon awakening at least several times per month using a portable blood ketone meter is recommended. The goal is to maintain blood beta-OH-butyrate concentrations less than 0.3 mmol/L. Alternatively morning urine ketone measurements may be assessed with regular urine dipsticks to give an overview of overnight metabolic control. The following are appropriate annually: Measurement of height and weight to monitor growth Liver ultrasound examination to screen for adenomas and evidence of liver scarring. MRI scans are limited to those individuals with abnormalities on the primary ultrasound screen. Laboratory studies: LFTs, CK, lipid profile Echocardiogram to monitor for cardiomyopathy; ECG Bone density measurements are recommended after growth is complete.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: High sugar intake as excess sugar is stored as glycogen, which cannot be broken down Steroid-based drugs as they interfere with glucose metabolism and utilization. Long-term steroid usage itself can cause muscle weakness. Growth hormone replacement therapy as it interferes with glucose metabolism, worsens ketosis, and may theoretically cause liver adenomas to grow Use the following with caution: Hormonal contraceptives in women as they can cause hepatic adenoma formation Statins for control of hyperlipidemia. Use of statins requires CK monitoring because of the potential of exacerbating the muscle disease of GSD IIIa. Beta blockers as they can induce hypoglycemia

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Diagnosis of at-risk sibs at birth allows for early dietary intervention to prevent development of hypoglycemia associated with GSD III. If the AGL pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing is the best way to determine the genetic status of an at-risk sib. If the AGL pathogenic variants in the family are not known, diagnosis can be established by presence of fasting ketotic hypoglycemia. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Increased monitoring and support are required in pregnancy of women with GSD III as glucose needs will increase. The metabolic requirements will gradually increase throughout the second and third trimesters, and close monitoring of both glucose and ketones is critical to ensure optimal metabolic control. In the third trimester and close to term, it is imperative to maintain ketones within normal levels as ketosis can precipitate uterine contractions and preterm labor. During labor and in the postnatal period, intravenous glucose supplementation must be available at all times to prevent hypoglycemic episodes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.