http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/gsd4

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with glycogen storage disease type IV (GSD IV), the following evaluations are recommended: Liver function studies including albumin, transaminases, and coagulation profile Abdominal ultrasound examination to assess liver size and texture Referral to a cardiologist for baseline echocardiogram and electrocardiogram (ECG) to assess for cardiomyopathy Neurodevelopmental evaluation Neurologic consultation and comprehensive neurologic examination with a baseline assessment of skeletal muscle involvement that can be used to monitor disease progression Medical or biochemical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management should involve a multidisciplinary team including specialists in hepatology, neurology, nutrition, medical or biochemical genetics, and child development. Hepatic manifestations. Liver transplantation is the only treatment option for individuals with the progressive hepatic subtype of GSD IV who develop liver failure. Of the 18 individuals with GSD IV who have received a liver transplant to date, two required a second liver transplant and six died: four from sepsis, one from hepatic artery thrombosis, and one from cardiomyopathy. The prognosis in persons with GSD IV who undergo liver transplantation is poor because of the significant risk for morbidity and mortality, which is in part attributed to the extrahepatic manifestations of GSD type IV, especially cardiomyopathy [Davis & Weinstein 2008, Magoulas et al 2012]. Selecting appropriate candidates for liver transplantation can be complex. Histologic, molecular, or clinical predictors of disease progression are likely to be useful in stratifying patients prior to liver transplantation [Davis & Weinstein 2008]. Factors such as glycogen branching enzyme (GBE) activity may not be the best predictor of outcome since the level of GBE activity in different tissues can vary by disease subtype and severity. Neurologic manifestations. Children with skeletal myopathy and/or hypotonia who experience motor developmental delay warrant developmental evaluation and physical therapy as needed. Cardiac manifestations. For those with cardiomyopathy, care by a cardiologist is warranted. Individuals with severe cardiomyopathy secondary to glycogenosis may be candidates for cardiac transplantation [Ewert et al 1999]; however, consideration of potential contraindications to cardiac transplantation, including myopathy, liver failure, and cachexia, is essential before pursuing this treatment option.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Nutritional deficiencies (e.g., of fat-soluble vitamins) can be prevented by ensuring adequate dietary intake based on frequent assessments by and recommendations of a dietitian experienced in managing children with liver disease. Bleeding due to coagulopathy can occur especially with surgical procedures; therefore, it is recommended that a coagulation profile be assessed before surgical procedures and fresh frozen plasma be given preoperatively as needed.

Surveillance

 No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available. The following evaluations are suggested with frequency varying according to the severity of the condition: Liver function tests including liver transaminases, albumin, and coagulation profile (PT and PTT) Abdominal ultrasound examination Echocardiogram Neurologic assessment Nutritional assessment Note: If cardiomyopathy was not observed on the baseline screening echocardiogram at the time of initial diagnosis, repeat echocardiograms are recommended every three months during infancy, every six months during early childhood, and annually thereafter.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 If the GBE1 pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, at-risk relatives can be tested so that those with the pathogenic variants can be evaluated for involvement of the liver, skeletal muscle, and heart to allow early diagnosis and management of disease manifestations. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.