

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with glycogen storage disease type V (GSDV), the following evaluations are recommended: Physical examination with emphasis on muscle strength/weakness Basal serum CK activity

Treatment of Manifestations

 Aerobic training (on a regular diet). In some individuals, improvement in exercise and circulatory capacity has been reported, probably caused by the increased circulatory capacity, which facilitates delivery of blood-borne fuels [Haller 2000]. In eight individuals who underwent a 14-week aerobic conditioning program in which they pedaled a cycloergometer for 30-40 minutes a day, four days a week at an intensity corresponding to 60% to 70% of maximal heart rate, an increase in work capacity, oxygen uptake, cardiac output, citrate synthase activity, and beta-hydroxyacyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase activity was observed, indicating that moderate aerobic exercise improves exercise capacity in individuals with GSDV [Haller et al 2006]. Nine individuals who underwent an eight-month supervised aerobic exercise training program including five weekly sessions of walking or cycling for no more than 60 minutes, improved their peak power output, peak oxygen uptake, and ventilatory threshold with no evidence of negative outcomes, suggesting that under carefully controlled conditions individuals with GSDV may exercise safely and may respond favorably to training [Maté-Muñoz et al 2007]. A systematic review of physical training for GSDV published in the Cochrane Database concluded that there are no randomized or quasi-randomized controlled trials of aerobic training in people with GSDV; however, three studies using small numbers of participants provided some evidence that aerobic training improves fitness without adverse events in people with GSDV. They suggested that it would be safe and worthwhile to conduct larger controlled trials of aerobic training in patients with GSDV [Quinlivan et al 2011]. In a subcohort of 63 patients (out of 239 registered) interviewed for their physical activity habits and whose peak oxygen uptake (and index of peak cardiorespiratory fitness and peak muscle oxidative capacity) were measured, the 32% who were physically active had higher levels of peak oxygen uptake (by 23%, p=0.003) and were more likely to improve their clinical course over a four-year period compared with inactive patients (odds ratio = 225; 95% confidence intervals 20.3 to 2496.7) after controlling for age. Moreover, for 81% of patients in the physically active cohort, clinical disease was reclassified as less severe. Mean peak oxygen uptake was very low, especially in women, where it barely reached the limit (13 mL O2/kg/min or 3.7 metabolic equivalents (METs, with 1MET equaling 3.5 mL O2/kg/min) necessary for independent living. Age also had a negative effect on peak oxygen uptake. However, the peak oxygen uptake in patients who were physically active was 1.5METs higher than in those who were not active. Seven patients (6 physically active) had a peak oxygen uptake of 8 METs, which is the minimum threshold for optimal health. Three daily habits recommended by Haller [2000] to improve the quality of life: Avoid intense isometric exercise and maximal aerobic exercise, which triggers cramps and, potentially, myoglobinuria (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). Avoid a totally sedentary life, which induces deconditioning. Engage in regular, moderate aerobic exercise, which improves cardiorespiratory capacity and increases delivery of blood-borne fuels, a sort of permanent "second wind" (i.e., decrease in heart rate and perceived exertion during exercise) effect [Ollivier et al 2005].

Pharmacologic and Nutritional Treatments

 Two systematic reviews of pharmacologic and nutritional treatments for GSDV were published in the Cochrane Database [Quinlivan & Beynon 2004, Quinlivan et al 2008]. The authors' conclusions: There is no evidence of significant benefit from any specific nutritional or pharmacologic treatment for GSDV. Low-dose creatine supplementation demonstrated a statistically significant benefit, albeit modest, in ischemic exercise in a small number of individuals. Ingestion of oral sucrose immediately prior to exercise reduces perceived ratings of exertion and heart rate and improves exercise tolerance. This treatment does not influence sustained or unexpected exercise. A carbohydrate-rich diet was of benefit. Because of the rarity of GSDV, multicenter collaboration and standardized assessment protocols are needed for future treatment trials. 
              Pharmacologic treatments Creatine monohydrate in a placebo-controlled crossover trial with nine affected individuals improved symptoms and increased their capacity for ischemic, isometric forearm exercise [Vorgerd et al 2000]. This positive effect did not result from increased levels of phosphocreatine in muscle. Rather, creatine may have a quenching effect on the potassium-mediated changes in membrane excitability. A subsequent clinical trial with high doses of creatine monohydrate in 19 individuals lowered exercise intolerance [Vorgerd et al 2002]. Thus, the indication for symptomatic therapy with creatine monohydrate needs to be strengthened. Ramipril, an ACE inhibitor, used in a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind pilot trial in eight persons with GSDV, decreased disability and improved exercise physiology only in those individuals with the ACE D/D genotype (see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations) [Martinuzzi et al 2008]. 
              Nutritional treatments In a single-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled crossover study in 12 individuals with GSDV, Vissing & Haller [2003b] found that ingestion of 75 g of sucrose markedly improved exercise tolerance. Ingesting simple carbohydrates (adult dose: 30-40 g glucose, fructose, or sucrose, or ~440 mL of most commercially available sport drinks; pediatric dose: 20 g) about five minutes before engaging in strenuous exercise such as brisk walking (or physical education classes in the younger individuals) can be helpful [Perez et al 2007, Andersen et al 2008]. In addition to increasing exercise capacity and sense of well-being, the treatment may protect against exercise-induced rhabdomyolysis. Ingestion of sucrose before exercise combined with an aerobic conditioning program is reasonable [Amato 2003]. Individuals with GSDV can also benefit from adopting a diet rich in complex carbohydrates (i.e., with a high proportion (65%) of complex carbohydrates such as those found in vegetables, fruits, cereals, bread, pasta, and rice) and a low proportion (20%) of fat [Andersen & Vissing 2008].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 See Treatment of Manifestations and Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 To prevent muscle breakdown (rhabdomyolysis) and myoglobinuria-induced renal damage: follow the exercise and nutritional measures described in Treatment of Manifestations.

Surveillance

 Appropriate surveillance includes: Annual routine physical examination Annual review of diet

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Exercises that involve heavy static contractions or induce severe myalgia should be avoided [Quinlivan et al 2011, Lucia et al 2012]. Exercises that should be avoided in patients with GSDV [Lucia et al 2008] are the following: Static muscle contractions (e.g., handgrip exercises) Static muscle contractions or heavy loads on low muscle mass (e.g., weightlifting) Dynamic exercises at a high-intensity level (e.g., competitive ball games) Exercises with a high involvement of eccentric (lengthening) muscle contractions (e.g., jumps) Very intense dynamic aerobic exercise (e.g., running, strenuous swimming, or cycling) except in individuals who are very fit and well habituated General anesthetics. Risk of acute muscle damage is reported with certain general anesthetics (usually muscle relaxants and inhaled anesthetics), although in practice, problems appear to be rare. One report showed hyperthermia, pulmonary edema, and rhabdomyolysis [Lobato et al 1999]; however, GSDV does not appear to cause severe perioperative problems in routine anesthetic care. Nonetheless, measures for preventing muscle ischemia and rhabdomyolysis should be taken in individuals with GSDV [Bollig 2013]. Lipid-lowering drugs. A study in which 136 individuals with myopathy induced by one of the three lipid-lowering drugs atorvastatin, cerivastatin, and simvastatin were tested for the two more frequent PYGM pathogenic variants (p.Arg50Ter, p.Gly205Ser) revealed 20-fold more PYGM heterozygotes than expected for the general population [Vladutiu et al 2006]. These findings provide preliminary evidence that PYGM heterozygotes may be predisposed to statin-induced myopathy; however, because only two pathogenic variants were assessed, some individuals in this study who were presumed to be carriers could actually be compound heterozygotes. Thus, clinicians should be cautious when recommending statins to individuals who have GSDV or are carriers for a PYGM pathogenic variant.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Early diagnosis of GSDV in relatives at risk may improve long-term outcome by heightening awareness of the need to avoid repetitive episodes of muscle damage that may lead to rhabdomyolysis and fixed weakness. When the family-specific PYGM pathogenic variants are known, molecular genetic testing can be used. When the family-specific PYGM pathogenic variants are not known, a reliable and accurate diagnosis of GSDV could be reached following the criteria described in Diagnosis. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

 The condition does not appear to adversely affect pregnancy and childbirth outcomes [Quinlivan et al 2010, Lucia et al 2012].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Gene therapy. An adenoviral recombinant containing the full-length human myophosphorylase cDNA was efficiently transduced into phosphorylase-deficient sheep and human myoblasts, where it restored enzyme activity [Pari et al 1999]. Adenovirus and adeno-associated virus-mediated delivery of human phosphorylase cDNA and LacZ cDNA to muscle in the ovine (sheep) model of McArdle disease showed expression of functional myophosphorylase and some re-expression of the non-muscle glycogen phosphorylase isoforms (liver and brain isoforms) in regenerating fibers [Howell et al 2008]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Vitamin B6 has been used because the overall body stores of pyridoxal phosphate are depleted in GSDV. A beneficial effect has been documented in two individuals, but this requires confirmation [Phoenix et al 1998, Sato et al 2012]. Branched-chain amino acids (BCA). Administration of BCA as alternative fuels to glycogen to six individuals worsened bicycle exercise capacity, possibly because of the free fatty acid-lowering effect of the amino acids [MacLean et al 1998].