http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/gsd9

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with liver PhK deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended: Measurement of blood glucose concentration (normal >70 mg/dL) for two to three days: upon waking in the morning; prior to meals and night time supplementation with oral cornstarch; and after activity Measurement of blood ketone levels for two to three days: upon waking in the morning; prior to meals and night time supplementation with oral cornstarch; and after activity. Elevated blood ketones (beta-hydroxybutyrate >1.0 mmol/L) could be an indicator of suboptimal metabolic control and pending hypoglycemia. Liver imaging, if not performed in the past year. The type of liver imaging (ultrasound, MRI, or CT) is determined by factors such as age and underlying liver status (such as liver cirrhosis). Basic metabolic panel including liver enzymes (AST, ALT, and alkaline phosphatase) Prothrombin time Lipid panel (cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations) Serum creatine kinase measurement (Some individuals with liver PhK deficiency can have muscle involvement) Baseline echocardiogram (Although cardiac problems have not been reported to occur in PhK deficiency [due to paucity of systematic investigation and lack of knowledge], baseline echocardiogram may be done as a precaution.) To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with muscle PhK deficiency, the following evaluations are suggested: Physical therapy evaluation Serum creatine kinase measurement

Treatment of Manifestations



Liver PhK Deficiency

Hypoglycemia
can be prevented with frequent daytime feedings that are high in complex carbohydrates and protein. The dose of cornstarch can range from 0.6 to 2.5 g/kg every six hours based on clinical symptoms. Protein should be given as 15% to 25% of total calories (tailored to the patient’s age) as long as renal function is normal. Protein provides an alternative source of glucose via intact gluconeogenesis. For signs of
hypoglycemia or ketosis, Polycose® or fruit juice should be given orally (if oral intake is tolerated) followed by a snack high in complex carbohydrates and protein. Blood glucose and ketone concentrations should be monitored periodically to ensure that they return to normal. If oral intake is not tolerated, an IV should be started. An initial glucose bolus (D50, or D10 if D50 not available) may be needed to maintain blood glucose concentrations above 70 mg/dL. The bolus can then be followed by 10% dextrose by IV. Symptomatic management of liver manifestations such as cirrhosis, liver failure, portal hypertension is appropriate.

Muscle PhK Deficiency

Signs and symptoms should be managed as with other muscle GSDs, such as GSD III [Kishnani et al 2010]. Physical therapy evaluation and intervention based on physical status and function Coordination with a metabolic nutritionist regarding monitoring and optimizing blood glucose concentrations based on levels of exercise and activity

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Liver PhK Deficiency

Hypoglycemia. Frequent feedings high in complex carbohydrates and protein are given to prevent hypoglycemia. In some individuals, no additional treatment is required to prevent hypoglycemia. However, some persons with liver PhK deficiency have severe and recurrent hypoglycemia which can be prevented by ingestion of uncooked cornstarch (range of cornstarch dose 0.6 to 2.5 g/kg) one to four times per day, depending on the severity of the condition. Some individuals may require cornstarch only before bedtime. Requirements for cornstarch tend to lessen with age.

Muscle PhK Deficiency

Little published information is available on prevention of primary manifestations in individuals with muscle PhK deficiency; however, regular moderate aerobic exercise may be beneficial. Intense exercise should be avoided as it may promote rhabdomyolysis and muscle cramping.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Liver PhK deficiency. Perioperative care for elective procedures should include IV glucose infusion preoperatively which should start as soon as the patient is made NPO. Continue with intraoperative and postoperative IV glucose infusion to prevent hypoglycemia. IV glucose should be tapered off gradually as the patient tolerates the usual diet. Abrupt discontinuation of fluids could result in hypoglycemia. If general anesthesia is required, malignant hyperthermia precautions should be taken as individuals with liver PhK deficiency may have increased CK levels and myopathy [Author, personal experience]. (See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility). During childhood, routine immunizations should be given on the recommended schedule. Any immunizations that may prevent illness, such as influenza leading to hypoglycemia, should be offered. Muscle PhK deficiency. Lipid-lowering drugs (e.g., statins) that can worsen or unmask myopathy should be used cautiously. If general anesthesia is required, malignant hyperthermia precautions should be taken as individuals with muscle PhK deficiency have increased CK levels and myopathy. (See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility). During childhood, routine immunizations should be given on the recommended schedule.

Surveillance


Liver PhK deficiency Regular evaluation by a metabolic physician familiar with liver PhK deficiency to monitor medical issues and a metabolic nutritionist to give dietary recommendations and monitor cornstarch requirement Regular monitoring of blood glucose concentration and ketones, as recommended by a metabolic physician and nutritionist. Blood glucose concentrations and ketones should also be measured during times of stress including illness, intense activity, rapid growth, puberty, and pregnancy; and at any time in which intake of food is reduced or meal and/or cornstarch dose or scheduling is altered. Note: It is possible that blood glucose concentrations may be normal when moderate to large ketosis in liver PhK deficiency results from increased fatty acid oxidation and upregulated gluconeogenesis. The role of ketone monitoring in this setting as a marker of metabolic control requires further systematic investigation. Liver imaging. In children younger than age 18 years, liver ultrasound examination every 12 to 24 months. With increasing age, consideration of CT or MRI using intravenous contrast to evaluate for complications of liver disease Follow-up echocardiogram. No guidelines established. Follow up approximately every two years or earlier if symptoms are present 
Muscle PhK deficiency Regular evaluation by a metabolic physician familiar with liver PhK deficiency to monitor medical issues and a metabolic nutritionist to give dietary recommendations and monitor cornstarch requirement. Regular evaluation by a physical therapist to look for progression in symptoms and to guide exercise program

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Liver PhK deficiency. Affected Individuals with should avoid the following: Large amounts of simple sugars as they will increase liver storage of glycogen. Prolonged fasting High impact contact sports if significant (moderate to massive) hepatomegaly is present. The final decision is based on clinician judgment. Drugs known to cause hypoglycemia such as insulin and insulin secretagogues (the sulfonylureas); though there are no reports in the literature of drugs precipitating hypoglycemia in children with liver PhK deficiency Alcohol, as this may predispose to hypoglycemia. Hypoglycemic events in adults with liver PhK deficiency are relatively uncommon; however, caution should be used with drugs causing potential hypoglycemia, particularly in persons with impaired liver function. Muscle PhK deficiency. Affected individuals should avoid the following: Vigorous exercise Medications that can cause rhabdomyolysis (e.g., succinylcholine)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Molecular genetic testing (if the family-specific variants are known) and/or evaluation by a metabolic physician during the first year of life (if the family-specific variants are not known) allows for early diagnosis and treatment for sibs at increased risk for liver PhK deficiency. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Ideally, women with PhK deficiency consult with their health care team and maintain optimal metabolic control before conception. It is extremely important that euglycemia is maintained throughout pregnancy to avoid upregulation of counterregulatory hormones which would result in lipolysis and ketosis, with risk of fetal demise. The appropriate diet during pregnancy is unique to each individual. For some, this may only require following a regular healthy diet, but for many it may mean increasing snacks to include more complex carbohydrates and protein and/or adding or increasing the amount of corn starch. Blood glucose concentrations and ketones should also be measured during pregnancy on a regular basis to ensure euglycemia. Adequate amounts of protein are necessary to provide an alternate source of glucose via gluconeogenesis.

Therapies Under Investigation

The improved and modified version of cornstarch, called Superstarch®, is under investigation for prevention of hypoglycemia in GSDs in general. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.