

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Hartsfield syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Determine the type of holoprosencephaly (alobar, semilobar, or lobar) by neuroimaging, preferably a brain MRI. Assess development including evidence of spasticity. Evaluate suspicious activity for evidence of seizures. Evaluate nutritional status and feeding for evidence of problems that may result from cleft lip/palate and/or oromotor dysfunction and other problems that may result from gastrointestinal involvement (e.g., slow gastric emptying, gastroesophageal reflux, constipation). Evaluate for evidence of diabetes insipidus, temperature dysregulation, and/or disturbance of sleep-wake cycles. Evaluate for evidence of endocrine deficiency (growth hormone deficiency, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, central diabetes insipidus). Consult with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Neurologic. Medically refractory epilepsy typically requires multiple antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). Spasticity can be treated with physical and occupational therapy and bracing. Muscle relaxants may be used to treat moderate or severe spasticity. Surgery may be required. 
            Hypothalamic involvement
           Central diabetes insipidus may require treatment with desmopressin. Temperature dysregulation can be managed by modifying the environment. Disturbance of sleep-wake cycles can be managed with good sleep hygiene and, if needed, with use of melatonin or other sleep aids such as clonidine. Skeletal. Surgery of hand and foot defects can improve dexterity. 
            Other
           Tethered cord may require surgical intervention. Cleft lip and palate: reparative surgery is needed in most. Some children may require a gastrostomy and/or tracheostomy.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.