http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hcp

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with hereditary coproporphyria (HCP), the following evaluations are recommended in an individual with acute abdominal symptoms: Review of medications for those that are thought to induce attacks (See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid.) Detailed neurologic examination for signs of motor neuropathy (which indicates a more advanced attack and, therefore, the need for early treatment with hematin) Inquiry into possibility of seizures Measurement of serum sodium concentration. Hyponatremia is characteristic and may be profound (serum sodium concentration <110 mEq/L), requiring urgent correction with due regard for the risk of central pontine myelinolysis. Quantitation of urinary excretion of porphobilinogen (PBG) on several occasions over a few months to establish a baseline for future use in determining if a new symptom or drug reaction is due to an acute attack (In an acute attack urinary excretion of PBG is substantially elevated over the baseline.) Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Acute Attacks

 Further details on the treatment of acute porphyria are available in published reviews [Anderson et al 2005, Stein et al 2013]. In an individual presenting with acute abdominal symptoms: Identify and discontinue any medications that are thought to induce attacks (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). Discontinue all nonessential medications. Evaluate those with nausea and vomiting for dehydration and hyponatremia, which is characteristic and may be profound (serum sodium concentration <110 mEq/L), requiring urgent correction with due regard for the risk of central pontine myelinolysis. Provide glucose-containing IV solution to reverse the fasting state. Note: Caution is indicated in patients with hyponatremia, as aggressive administration of dextrose in water may cause the serum sodium concentration to drop to a critically low level. Treat seizures with a short-acting benzodiazepine (e.g., midazolam) or with magnesium, which has been used for eclamptic seizures [Sadeh et al 1991]. Note: A number of the commonly used anti-seizure medications, including phenytoin and sodium valproate, are contraindicated because of the risk of further exacerbating an attack (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). Intravenous hematin is the treatment of choice in moderate to severe acute attacks. Order hematin at the time that an acute attack requires hospitalization. Although hematin is not stocked by most hospital pharmacies, it can be obtained by overnight express from the manufacturer (Panhematin®, Recordati, 1-888-575-8344). An alternative in Europe and elsewhere is heme arginate (Normosang®; not yet approved in the US). Some individuals recover with a glucose infusion only; those who do not respond in 24 to 48 hours should receive intravenous hematin. When signs of a motor neuropathy are present, hematin is given as soon as possible. Hematin given at the initial signs of motor neuropathy may halt its progression; however, it has no effect on established motor deficits, which are the result of axonal degeneration. Hematin is reconstituted at the bedside as described in the package insert. Human albumin may be used in place of water (132 mL of a 25% albumin solution) to reduce the risk of a chemical phlebitis, which is the main side effect of hematin administration [Anderson et al 2006]. The infusion is started without delay, as hematin in solution decays rapidly [Goetsch & Bissell 1986]. The preparation is given into a large peripheral vein or via central line over 10-15 minutes so as to minimize the risk of phlebitis. The dose is weight based at 3-4 mg/kg; 200 mg once daily is appropriate for most individuals. The following responses to hematin infusion can be expected: Decrease in the urine concentration of PBG, the first sign, occurs after two doses. Clinical improvement is seen after a total of three or four doses, and typically is dramatic, with no further need of narcotic analgesia [Bissell 1988]. The motor neuropathy of acute attacks, when it occurs, does not respond to hematin administration. Return of function requires axonal regeneration and takes many months. Although it can be complete, some individuals have residual wrist drop or foot drop. Liver transplantation. The experience with liver transplantation in acute porphyria is growing, with accumulating evidence that transplantation is curative in selected severe cases [Singal et al 2014]. The status of the disease in candidates for liver transplantation must be well-documented biochemically: they must not have responded to multiple courses of hematin and must be demonstrating neurologic complications.

Chronic (Cutaneous) Manifestations

 For low-grade chronic or seasonal cutaneous symptoms, the only effective current treatment is avoidance of sun/light, whether direct or through window glass. Damage is caused by blue light and long-wave ultraviolet light (UVA), both of which pass through window glass: Sun protection using protective clothing such as long sleeves, gloves, and wide brimmed hats Protective tinted glass for cars and windows to prevent exposure to blue light. Grey or smoke colored filters provide only partial protection. Note: Topical sunscreens are not helpful because they block UVB light, not the blue light that causes porphyrin-related skin injury. The association of cutaneous manifestations with severe attacks (in which porphyrins as well as ALA and PBG are markedly increased) suggests that the cutaneous, as well as the neurovisceral, symptoms could respond to hematin administration. Indeed, this is the finding of a recent case report of an individual with severe HCP who was given ‘maintenance’ hematin [Ma et al 2011]. Other. For more prolonged control of seizures, the combination of gabapentin and propofol is effective and safe.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Prevention of acute attacks
involves the following: Molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives to identify those heterozygous for the CPOX pathogenic variant identified in the proband Education of CPOX heterozygotes regarding circumstances that may trigger an acute attack (See Clinical Description.) Selection of appropriate contraception for females. Oral contraceptives (birth control pills) are risky and not recommended. The recommended method of birth control for HCP heterozygotes is an IUD plus a barrier (diaphragm and/or condom). A copper-eluting IUD is theoretically the safest in porphyria. The hormone-eluting variety may also be safe because the systemic increase in hormone is quite small; however, little information exists. Suppression of menses using a GnRH agonist. Leuprolide, nafarelin, and other GnRH agonists may help CPOX heterozygotes who experience monthly exacerbations. CPOX heterozygotes undergoing surgery are at increased risk for an acute attack because of the routine preoperative fast and the (former) use of barbiturate (thiopental) induction of anesthesia. Adherence to the following recommendations greatly reduces the risk of an acute attack: Minimizing the preoperative fast as much as possible and providing intravenous glucose (10% dextrose in half-normal saline) in the perioperative period Anesthesia induction using non-barbiturate agents that have little or no P450-inducing activity (e.g., propofol, ketamine, short-acting benzodiazepines). Inhalation agents (isoflurane) and muscle relaxants also appear to be low-risk for triggering an attack. Prevention of acute attacks
does not
involve the following: Use of glucose. Because glucose is used to treat acute attacks, its use in preventing attacks has been suggested, and is in fact touted in lay discussions of porphyria; however, there is no evidence that heterozygotes can protect themselves by overeating or adopting a high-carbohydrate diet, and they risk becoming obese. Heterozygotes should adhere to a healthful diet with the usual balance of protein, fat, and carbohydrate. Weight loss is possible but only by incremental restriction of calories combined with exercise. Extreme diets (e.g., all bacon, all brown rice, starvation) are risky and should be avoided. Liver transplantation. Because the vast majority of attacks respond to hematin and other supportive measures, liver transplantation has no role in prevention of acute attacks in a CPOX heterozygote.

Surveillance

 For those who have chronically elevated ALA (which is infrequent in those who are asymptomatic) and/or are older than age 60 years, an annual check of liver and kidney function is recommended. Current noninvasive techniques for assessment of fibrosis in the liver include transient elastography (FibroScan®) and a blood-based test (FibroTest® or FibroSure®). Note: They have been vetted mainly for people with chronic viral hepatitis or steatohepatitis but may also be useful in porphyria. For anyone with evidence of chronic liver injury, annual screening for hepatocellular carcinoma with abdominal imaging (such as ultrasound) and serum alpha-fetoprotein is indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Extreme caloric deprivation (i.e., total fasting, gastric bypass surgery) Female reproductive hormones. Birth-control pills are risky and not recommended. For recommendations regarding contraception, see Prevention of Primary Manifestations, Selection of appropriate contraception for females. Medications. Some drugs are clearly unsafe for CPOX heterozygotes. It is important to note, however, that many drugs are safe, lest providers regard individuals with acute porphyria as “untreatable.” Compilations of safe and unsafe drugs are available online and are updated as new information becomes available. See www.porphyriafoundation.com and www.porphyria-europe.com. In theory, the most dangerous medications are inducers of CYPs, such as barbiturates and the related compound, phenytoin.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk for HCP in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from education regarding the risk factors associated with acute attacks. If the CPOX pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives. If the CPOX pathogenic variant in the family is not known, a first-degree relative with symptoms can be evaluated with biochemical tests (see Diagnosis). Note: Although some CPOX heterozygotes have a diagnostic biochemical profile of heme precursors in urine and feces (see Table 1, ‘Active’ columns), many have normal findings (see Table 1, ‘Asymptomatic’ columns) and can only be diagnosed by molecular genetic testing. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 The effect of pregnancy on inducing acute attacks is unpredictable. In general, serious problems during pregnancy are unusual. In fact, some women with recurrent symptoms associated with the menstrual cycle report improvement during pregnancy. Attacks, if they occur, are usually in the first trimester. The women most at risk are those with hyperemesis gravidarum and inadequate caloric intake [Aggarwal et al 2002]. Among antiemetics, ondansetron is not expected to precipitate or exacerbate acute attacks or to increase the risk for congenital anomalies in the fetus; however, metoclopramide should be avoided, as it may precipitate acute attacks [Shenhav et al 1997]. The experience with administration of hematin (or heme arginate, which is not available in the US) during pregnancy is limited. Badminton & Deybach [2006] published an anecdotal report of successful heme arginate treatment (without adverse fetal effect) in several women experiencing attacks of variegate porphyria or other acute porphyrias during pregnancy. Based on the absence of reported adverse effects, use of hematin to control exacerbations of acute intermittent porphyria during pregnancy has been recommended [Isenschmid et al 1992, Farfaras et al 2010].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Due to the rarity of symptomatic acute porphyria, the efficacy of intravenous hematin has never been documented in a controlled trial. Efforts to accomplish this are under way. Planned studies focus on individuals who have spontaneous acute attacks in the absence of any known external trigger in order to identify genetic cofactors that may be involved in such attacks, and are thus potential targets for new therapies. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.