

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with adult-onset leukoencephalopathy with axonal spheroids and pigmented glia (ALSP), the following evaluations are recommended: Complete neurologic assessment Psychological and psychiatric assessments Brain MRI to determine the extent and localization of white matter changes, presence of cortical atrophy, and involvement of the corpus callosum and corticospinal tracts Assessment of feeding/eating, digestive problems (constipation, incontinence), and nutrition based on patient history EEG or video EEG if a seizure disorder is suspected; evaluation of the need for antiepileptic drugs Lumbar puncture to measure neurofilament light protein (NFL) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to follow the disease progression. An increased level of NFL on repeat CSF examinations may suggest faster disease course and thus worse prognosis. Assessment of family and social structure to determine the availability of adequate support system Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 No specific therapy is currently available for ALSP. Management is supportive and includes: attention to general care, nutritional requirements, antiepileptic drugs for seizures, and antibiotic treatment for general and recurrent infections such as pneumonia or urinary tract infections. Other: L-dopa or other dopaminergic therapies have not been beneficial in individuals with ALSP or in those with an atypical parkinsonian phenotype, but may be worth trying. Antidepressant medications may be prescribed for depression but reports to date have demonstrated no long-term benefit. Antipsychotics are in general not recommended due to extrapyramidal side effects, but may be used in aggressive individuals. Anti-seizure medications should be initiated in any individuals with seizures and are reported to be beneficial.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Social problems (unemployment, divorce, financial troubles, and alcoholism) and suicidal tendencies are often associated with the progression of the disease. Some of the social consequences may be avoided if family members are informed early about the nature of the disorder.

Surveillance

 Periodic clinical evaluation to monitor for the following is appropriate: Changes in mobility, communication, and behavior, which could indicate a need to alter care and support systems (wheelchair/ personal assistance) Onset of seizures and need for antiepileptic therapy Contractures, which could indicate a need to change medical management and physical therapy Behavioral changes, inappropriate emotions and actions, problems following directions, memory loss, incontinence, which indicate curtailing of independence Difficulties in swallowing or weight loss, which trigger consideration for gastrostomy Need for physical therapy to minimize contractures and maintain locomotion Longitudinal MRI studies can potentially help with prognosis, as during the disease course the more rapid the confluence of patchy or focal T2 hyperintensities and the progression of cortical atrophy, the poorer the prognosis appears to be [Van Gerpen et al 2008, Sundal et al 2012c].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 The following should be avoided: Use of first-generation neuroleptics, which increase seizure risk and risk of additional parkinsonian signs Treatment agents for multiple sclerosis, as these medications are of no benefit and have major side effects

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.