http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hemo-b

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hemophilia B, the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

A personal and family history of bleeding to help predict disease severity

A joint and muscle evaluation, particularly if the individual describes a history of hemarthrosis or deep-muscle hematomas

Screening for hepatitis A, B, and C as well as HIV if blood products or plasma-derived clotting factor concentrates were administered prior to 1990

Baseline CBC including platelet count and ferritin, especially if there is a history of nose bleeds, GI bleeding, mouth bleeding, or in females, heavy menstrual bleeding or postpartum hemorrhage

Referral to a hemophilia treatment center. For locations:

Worldwide, see World Federation of Hæmophilia;

US only, see National Hemophilia Foundation.

Identification of the specific F9 pathogenic variant in an individual to aid in determining disease severity, the likelihood of inhibitor development, and the risk of anaphylaxis if an inhibitor does develop

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor, particularly if a new diagnosis in the family and for females of childbearing years

Treatment of Manifestations



The World Federation of Hæmophilia has published treatment guidelines for the management of individuals with hemophilia. Treatment should be coordinated through a hemophilia treatment center (for locations in the USA: see National Hemophilia Foundation; elsewhere worldwide: see World Federation of Hæmophilia).

Intravenous infusion of plasma-derived or recombinant factor IX for bleeding episodes should be initiated within an hour of noticing symptoms.

Dosing is weight based and target levels and duration of treatment vary by the severity of bleeding and/or the risk associated with the surgery or procedure.

Identify staff members who are expert in performing venipunctures in infants and toddlers because frequent venipunctures may be necessary.

Parents of children age two to five years with severe hemophilia B should be trained to administer the infusions as soon as is feasible. Home treatment allows for prompt treatment and facilitates prophylactic therapy.

Pediatric issues. Special considerations for care of infants and children with hemophilia B include the following [Chalmers et al 2011]:

Infant males with a family history of hemophilia B should not be circumcised unless hemophilia B is either excluded or, if present, treated with factor IX concentrate directly before and after the procedure.

Immunizations should be administered subcutaneously; intramuscular injections should be avoided unless under factor coverage.

Effective dosing of factor IX requires an understanding of different pharmacokinetics in young children.

Inhibitors. Alloimmune inhibitors to factor IX, seen in 1%-3% of persons with severe hemophilia B, greatly compromise the ability to manage bleeding episodes [Hay et al 2006]. Their onset can be associated with anaphylactic reactions to factor IX infusion and nephrotic syndrome [DiMichele 2007, Chitlur et al 2009]. Immune tolerance can be challenging and long-term bypassing therapy may be needed for treatment.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Prophylactic treatment is recommended by the National Hemophilia Foundation and the World Federation of Hæmophilia for children with severe hemophilia and is usually administered as infusion of factor IX concentrate twice weekly or every other day to maintain factor IX clotting activity above 1%, although a less intense regimen may provide protection for some affected boys [Fischer et al 2002]. Also, some individuals will require troughs higher than 1% to prevent bleeding. Longer-acting factor IX concentrates that extend the half-life three- to fivefold are now available. Choice of product should be individualized based on clinical factors and activity levels. Initiation of prophylactic infusions of factor IX concentrate in young boys before or just after their first few joint bleeds has been shown to nearly eliminate spontaneous bleeding and prevent chronic joint disease [Manco-Johnson et al 2007]. Prophylaxis in adults is standard of care in many countries and has been shown to decrease bleeding and improve joint function and quality of life [Josephson 2013, Manco-Johnson et al 2013]

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Many recombinant products are now produced without human- or animal-derived proteins in the process or final product. Virucidal treatment of plasma-derived concentrates has eliminated the risk of HIV transmission since 1985, and of hepatitis B and C viruses since 1990.

Surveillance



Persons with hemophilia followed at hemophilia treatment centers (HTCs) (see Resources) have lower mortality than those who are not [Soucie et al 2000, Pai et al 2016].

Young children with severe or moderate hemophilia B should be evaluated at an HTC (accompanied by the parents) every six to 12 months to review their history of bleeding episodes and adjust treatment plans as needed. Early signs and symptoms of possible bleeding episodes are reviewed. The assessment should also include a joint and muscle evaluation, an inhibitor screen, viral testing if indicated, and a discussion of any other problems related to the individual's hemophilia and family and community support.

Screening for alloimmune inhibitors is usually done in those with severe hemophilia B after treatment with factor IX concentrates has been initiated for either bleeding or prophylaxis. Affected individuals at increased risk for inhibitor formation should be closely monitored during initial infusions and additional screening is usually performed up to a few years of age when the genotype is a large partial deletion, complete F9 deletion, or early termination variant (<100 predicted amino acids) (see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations and Molecular Genetics, Pathogenic variants). Testing for inhibitors should also be performed in any individual with hemophilia B whenever a suboptimal clinical response to treatment is suspected, regardless of disease severity; with hemophilia B, the onset may be heralded by an allergic reaction to infused factor IX concentrate.

Older children and adults with severe or moderate hemophilia B benefit from at least yearly assessments at an HTC (see Resources) and periodic assessments to review bleeding episodes and treatment plans, evaluate joints and muscles, screen for an inhibitor, perform viral testing if indicated, provide education, and discuss other issues relevant to the individual's hemophilia.

Individuals with mild hemophilia B can benefit from an assessment at an HTC every one to two years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



The following should be avoided:

Circumcision of infant males with a family history of hemophilia B unless hemophilia B is excluded; OR if circumcision is performed on an infant with hemophilia B, the infant should be treated with factor IX concentrate directly before and after the procedure.

Intramuscular injections

Activities that involve a high risk of trauma, particularly of head injury

Medications and herbal remedies that affect platelet function, including aspirin unless there is strong medical indication (e.g., in individuals with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease). Individuals with severe hemophilia usually require clotting factor prophylaxis to allow aspirin and other platelet inhibitory drugs to be used safely [Angelini et al 2016].

Older, intermediate purity plasma-derived “prothrombin complex” concentrates should be used cautiously (if at all) in hemophilia B because of their thrombogenic potential.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Identification of at-risk relatives. A thorough family history may identify other male relatives who are at risk but have not been tested (particularly in families with mild hemophilia B).

Early determination of the genetic status of males at risk. Either assay of factor IX clotting activity from a cord blood sample obtained by venipuncture of the umbilical vein (to avoid contamination by amniotic fluid or placenta tissue) or molecular genetic testing for the family-specific F9 pathogenic variant can establish or exclude the diagnosis of hemophilia B in newborn males at risk. Infants with a family history of hemophilia B should not be circumcised unless hemophilia B is either excluded or, if present, factor IX concentrate is administered immediately before and after the procedure to prevent delayed oozing and poor wound healing.

Note: (1) The cord blood for factor IX clotting activity assay should be drawn into a syringe containing one-tenth volume of sodium citrate to avoid clotting and to provide an optimal mixing of the sample with the anticoagulant. (2) Factor IX clotting activity in cord blood in a normal-term newborn is lower than in adults (mean: ~30%; range: 15%-50%); thus, the diagnosis of hemophilia B can be established in an infant with activity lower than 1%, but is equivocal in an infant with moderately low (15%-20%) activity.

Determination of genetic status of females at risk. Approximately 30% of heterozygous females have factor IX clotting activity lower than 40% and may have abnormal bleeding. In a recent Dutch survey of heterozygous females, bleeding symptoms correlated with baseline factor clotting activity; there was suggestion of a very mild increase in bleeding even in those with 40% to 60% factor IX clotting activity [Plug et al 2006]. Joint range of motion in female carriers with factor VIII or factor IX activity lower than 40% was found to be significantly different from that measured in normal controls and inversely related to factor level [Sidonio et al 2014]. All daughters and mothers of an affected male and other at-risk females should have a baseline factor IX clotting activity assay to determine if they are at increased risk for bleeding (unless they are known to be non-carriers based on molecular genetic testing). Very occasionally, a female will have particularly low factor IX clotting activity that may result from heterozygosity for an F9 pathogenic variant associated with skewed X-chromosome inactivation or, on rare occasion, compound heterozygosity for two F9 pathogenic variants.

It is recommended that the carrier status of a female at risk be established prior to pregnancy or as early in a pregnancy as possible.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Obstetric issues. It is recommended that the carrier status of a female at risk be established prior to pregnancy or as early in a pregnancy as possible.

Unlike for factor VIII (FVIII), maternal factor IX levels do not increase during pregnancy and carriers are more likely to need factor infusion support for delivery or to treat or prevent postpartum hemorrhage. In carriers, postpartum hemorrhage has been a prominent feature, despite the absence of heavy menstrual bleeding [Yang & Ragni 2004].

If the female has a baseline factor IX clotting activity below approximately 40%, she by definition has hemophilia and is at risk for excessive bleeding, particularly post partum, and may require therapy with factor IX concentrate [Yang & Ragni 2004].

Newborn males. Controversy remains as to indications for cesarean section versus vaginal delivery [James & Hoots 2010, Ljung 2010]. For elective deliveries, the relative risks of cesarean section versus vaginal delivery should be considered, especially if a male has been diagnosed with severe hemophilia B prenatally.

At birth or in the early neonatal period, intracranial hemorrhage is uncommon (<1%-2%), even in males with severe hemophilia B who are delivered vaginally.

Therapies Under Investigation



Recombinant factor IX (FIX) proteins with prolonged survival. Two products with modifications to prolong half-life (Fc or albumin fusion proteins) are now FDA approved and others, including with site-specific PEGylation, have completed Phase III clinical trials [Powell et al 2013, Peyvandi et al 2016, Santagostino et al 2016]. Clinical trial data show a three- to five fold prolongation of FIX half-life with the fusion proteins.

Gene therapy for hemophilia B. Several clinical trials of gene therapy using intravenous infusion of an adeno-associated viral vector expressing factor IX are underway; some have shown sustained factor levels [Lheriteau et al 2015]. These vectors use liver-restricted promoters to target synthesis to the natural site of FIX synthesis.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other



Vitamin K does not prevent or control bleeding caused by hemophilia B.

Fresh frozen plasma is no longer recommended to treat hemophilia B because it is not treated with a virucidal agent.