

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hemophilia A, the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed: A personal and family history of bleeding to help predict disease severity A joint and muscle evaluation, particularly if the individual describes a history of hemarthrosis or deep-muscle hematomas Screening for hepatitis A, B, and C as well as HIV if blood products or plasma-derived clotting factor concentrates were administered prior to 1990 Baseline CBC with a platelet count, especially if there is a history of nose bleeds, GI bleeding, mouth bleeding, or (in females) menorrhagia or postpartum hemorrhage Referral to a hemophilia treatment center. For locations: Worldwide, see World Federation of Hæmophilia; US only, see National Hemophilia Foundation. Identification of the specific F8 pathogenic variant in an individual to aid in determining disease severity, the likelihood of inhibitor development, and the chance that immune tolerance will be successful if an inhibitor does develop Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor, particularly for a new diagnosis in the family and for females of childbearing years

Treatment of Manifestations

 The World Federation of Hemophilia has published treatment guidelines for the management of individuals with hemophilia. Treatment should be coordinated through a hemophilia treatment center. (Individuals in the USA see National Hemophilia Foundation; individuals worldwide see World Federation of Hemophilia for locations). Intravenous infusion of plasma-derived or recombinant factor VIII for bleeding episodes within an hour of noticing symptoms: Dosing is weight based and target levels and duration of treatment vary by the severity of bleeding and/or the risk associated with the surgery or procedure. Staff members who are expert in performing venipunctures in infants and toddlers should be identified, as frequent venipunctures may be necessary. Parents of children age two to five years with severe hemophilia A should be trained to administer the infusions. Home treatment allows for prompt treatment and facilitates prophylactic therapy. Pediatric issues. Special considerations for care of infants and children with hemophilia A include the following [Chalmers et al 2011, Srivastava et al 2013]: Infant males with a family history of hemophilia A should not be circumcised unless hemophilia A is either excluded or, if present, is treated with factor VIII concentrate directly before and after the procedure. Immunizations should be administered preferably subcutaneously; intramuscular injections should be avoided unless under factor coverage. Effective dosing of factor VIII requires an understanding of different pharmacokinetics in young children. DDAVP®
(desmopressin acetate). For individuals with mild hemophilia A, including symptomatic females, immediate treatment of bleeding can be achieved with DDAVP®. A single intravenous dose often doubles or triples factor VIII clotting activity. Alternatively, a multi-use nasal formulation of DDAVP® Nasal may be more convenient. Note: Hemophilia genotype influences DDAVP® response [Castaman et al 2009, Nance et al 2013]. Immune tolerance therapy. Alloimmune inhibitors to factor VIII greatly compromise the ability to manage bleeding episodes [Fogarty & Kessler 2013]. High titer inhibitors can often be eliminated by immune tolerance therapy [Hay & DiMichele 2012]. Individuals with large gene deletions are less likely to respond to immune tolerance than individuals with other types of variants [Coppola et al 2009].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Prophylactic treatment is recommended by the National Hemophilia Foundation and the World Federation of Hemophilia for children with severe hemophilia and is usually administered as infusions of factor VIII concentrate three times a week or every other day to maintain factor VIII clotting activity above 1%, although a less intense regimen may provide protection for some affected boys [Fischer et al 2002, Feldman et al 2006]. Newer modified recombinant products with longer half-lives allow less frequent infusions. Factor VIII concentrate infusions given prophylactically in young boys before or just after their first few joint bleeds can nearly eliminate spontaneous bleeding and prevent chronic joint disease [Manco-Johnson et al 2007]. The greatest benefit is seen in affected individuals who start therapy before age 2.5 to three years. Routine prophylaxis begun later in childhood or in adults significantly decreases bleeding episodes [Valentino et al 2012, Manco-Johnson et al 2013, Mondorf et al 2013]. "Secondary" prophylaxis, started after some joint damage has occurred, can be given on a long-term basis or around periods of increased activity or surgical procedures. An increasing number of adults with hemophilia are on long-term prophylaxis and clinical benefit is being documented in short- and long-term studies.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Reduction of bleeding and chronic joint disease is achieved by prophylactic treatment and prompt effective treatment of bleeding, including by use of home therapy. Many recombinant products are now created without human- or animal-derived proteins in the process or final product. Virucidal treatment of plasma-derived concentrates has eliminated the risk of HIV transmission since 1985, and of hepatitis B and C viruses since 1990.

Surveillance

 Persons with hemophilia who are followed at hemophilia treatment centers (HTCs) (see Resources) have lower mortality than those who are not [Soucie et al 2000, Pai et al 2016]. Young children with severe or moderate hemophilia A should be evaluated at an HTC (accompanied by their parents) every six to 12 months to review their history of bleeding episodes and adjust treatment plans as needed. Early signs and symptoms of possible bleeding episodes are reviewed. The assessment should also include a joint and muscle evaluation, an inhibitor screen, and a discussion of any other problems related to the individual's hemophilia and family and community support. Screening for alloimmune inhibitors is indicated at least once during the first ten to 20 treatment days in children with severe hemophilia, and then every three to six months after treatment with factor VIII concentrates has been initiated either for bleeding or prophylaxis. After 50 to 100 exposure days, annual screening and screening prior to elective surgical procedures is sufficient. Testing for inhibitors should be performed in any individual with hemophilia whenever a suboptimal clinical response to treatment is suspected, regardless of disease severity. Older children and adults with severe or moderate hemophilia A benefit from at least yearly contact with an HTC (see Resources) and periodic assessments to review bleeding episodes and treatment plans, evaluate joints and muscles, screen for an inhibitor, perform viral testing if indicated, provide education, and discuss other issues relevant to the individual's hemophilia. Individuals with mild hemophilia A can benefit from an assessment at an HTC every one to two years. Affected individuals with comorbidities and other complications or treatment challenges may require more frequent visits.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Infant males with a family history of hemophilia A should not be circumcised unless hemophilia A is excluded; or, if present, the infant should be treated with factor VIII concentrate directly before and after the procedure. Medications and herbal remedies that affect platelet function, including aspirin, should be avoided unless there is strong medical indication, such as in individuals with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Individuals with severe hemophilia usually require clotting factor prophylaxis to allow aspirin and other platelet inhibitory drugs to be used safely [Angelini et al 2016]. Avoid the following: Intramuscular injections Activities that involve a high risk of trauma, particularly of head injury

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Identification of at-risk relatives. A thorough family history may identify other relatives who are at risk but have not been tested (particularly in families with mild hemophilia A). Early determination of the genetic status of males at risk. Either assay of factor VIII clotting activity from a cord blood sample obtained by venipuncture of the umbilical vein (to avoid contamination by amniotic fluid or placenta tissue) or molecular genetic testing for the family-specific F8 pathogenic variant can establish or exclude the diagnosis of hemophilia A in newborn males at risk. Infants with a family history of hemophilia A should not be circumcised unless hemophilia A is either excluded or, if present, factor VIII concentrate is administered immediately before and after the procedure to prevent delayed oozing and poor wound healing. Note: Ideally, the cord blood for factor VIII clotting activity assay should be drawn into a syringe containing one-tenth volume of sodium citrate to avoid clotting and to provide an optimal mixing of the sample with the anticoagulant. If not available a standard blue top tube can be used. Determination of genetic status of females at risk. Approximately 30% of heterozygous females have factor VIII activity lower than 40% and may have abnormal bleeding. In a survey of Dutch heterozygous females, bleeding symptoms correlated with baseline factor clotting activity; there was suggestion of a very mild increase in bleeding even in those with 40% to 60% factor VIII activity [Plug et al 2006]. Therefore, all daughters and mothers of an affected male and other at-risk females should have a baseline factor VIII clotting activity assay to determine if they are at increased risk for bleeding (unless they are known to be non-carriers based on molecular genetic testing). Very occasionally, a female will have particularly low factor VIII clotting activity that may result from heterozygosity for an F8 pathogenic variant associated with skewed X-chromosome inactivation or, on rare occasion, compound heterozygosity for two F8 pathogenic variants [Pavlova et al 2009]. It is recommended that the carrier status of a female at risk be established prior to pregnancy or as early in a pregnancy as possible. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Obstetric issues. It is recommended that the carrier status of a female at risk be established prior to pregnancy or as early in a pregnancy as possible. If the female is symptomatic (i.e., has baseline factor VIII clotting activity <40%), she will be somewhat protected by the natural rise of factor VIII clotting activity during pregnancy, which may even double by the end of the third trimester. The factor VIII level should be measured in the third trimester to confirm that the level is in the normal range, and if it is not, a plan for factor replacement therapy should be developed. Postpartum factor VIII clotting activity can return to baseline within 48 hours, and postpartum hemorrhage may ensue [Lee et al 2006]. Newborn males. Controversy remains as to indications for cesarean section versus vaginal delivery [James & Hoots 2010, Chalmers et al 2011]. In retrospective data analysis of 580 males age 0-2 years with hemophilia, 17 suffered intracranial hemorrhages with delivery, and all but one were delivered vaginally [Kulkarni et al 2009]. This finding supports the recommendation of cesarean section for hemophilic infants, however, 12 of the 17 were born to women not known to be carriers, suggesting that a planned delivery may mitigate risks. In anticipation of delivery, the relative risks of cesarean section versus vaginal delivery should be considered and discussed with the family and obstetrician in anticipation of delivery so that a coordinated plan can be developed.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Recombinant factor VIII molecules are being modified to extend their half-life and allow less frequent infusions [Young & Mahlangu 2016]. Two products are FDA approved, one modified by pegylation and one by Fc fusion; others are in clinical trials. These result in half-life extension by approximately 1.5 fold. Products with greater half-life extension are under development. Attempts are being made to learn more about the immunology of inhibitors and ways to prevent them or improve the success rate of immune tolerance [Zakarija et al 2011, Hay & DiMichele 2012, Astermark et al 2013]. Several novel products that “bypass” the need for factor VIII or factor IX are in clinical or preclinical study [Kaufman & Powell 2013]. Clinical trials for gene therapy for hemophilia A have begun and others are in the preclinical phase [Spencer et al 2016]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Vitamin K does not prevent or control bleeding in hemophilia A. Cryoprecipitate is no longer recommended to treat hemophilia A because it is not treated with a virucidal agent.