http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hemochromatosis

Management

The American Association for the Study of Liver Disease (AASLD) has published practice guidelines for diagnosis and management of hemochromatosis [Bacon et al 2011] (full text). The European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) published Clinical Practice Guidelines on the Management of hemochromatosis [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010] (full text).

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis (HFE-HH), the following evaluations are recommended at initial diagnosis: Serum ferritin concentration to establish disease status and prognosis (see Figure 2) For p.Cys282Tyr homozygotes: Liver biopsy remains the gold standard for establishing or excluding cirrhosis. Liver biopsy is recommended for those with serum ferritin >1,000 ng/mL or elevated AST and ALT to evaluate for advanced hepatic fibrosis [Morrison et al 2003, Bacon et al 2011]. Liver biopsy is not recommended for those with serum ferritin concentration <1,000 ng/mL and normal ALT and AST because their risk for advanced hepatic fibrosis is low [Bacon et al 2011]. MRI to estimate parenchymal iron content by utilizing the paramagnetic properties of iron: A specialized MRI technique with excellent sensitivity for estimation of hepatic iron concentration was approved by the FDA for clinical use [St Pierre et al 2005]. This method of quantitative MRI accurately measures liver iron within a sufficiently wide liver iron concentration range. Compared with liver biopsy, MRI-R2 is noninvasive and significantly reduces biopsy sampling error [Fischer & Harmatz 2009]. In addition, T2* MRI measurement of liver iron is now widely available [Brittenham et al 2003, Cheong et al 2005, Ptaszek et al 2005]. Cardiac iron concentration can also be monitored using similar techniques and may be of prognostic value [Fischer & Harmatz 2009, Ramazzotti et al 2009]. Biomagnetic liver susceptometry (BLS) to estimate liver iron by measuring the change in magnetic flux as a hemochromatosis patient moves through a stable magnetic field, generating a voltage in the SQUID sensor [Fischer & Harmatz 2009]. As BLS is not widely available it is not included in diagnosis or management guidelines for hemochromatosis. Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The American Association for the Study of Liver Disease (AASLD) has published practice guidelines for diagnosis and management of hemochromatosis [Bacon et al 2011] (full text). The European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) published Clinical Practice Guidelines on the Management of hemochromatosis [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010] (full text).

Clinical 

Therapeutic phlebotomy is indicated in the presence of symptoms of iron overload or evidence of end-organ damage (e.g., advanced cirrhosis, cardiac failure, skin pigment changes, or diabetes): Periodic phlebotomy is a simple, inexpensive, safe, and effective treatment. Each unit of blood (400-500 mL) with a hematocrit of 40% contains approximately 160-200 mg of iron. Each mL of packed red blood cells contains 1 mg of iron. The usual therapy is removal of the excess iron by weekly phlebotomy (i.e., removal of a unit of blood) until the serum ferritin concentration is 50 ng/mL or lower. Twice-weekly phlebotomy may be occasionally useful to accelerate iron depletion. Weekly phlebotomy is carried out until the hematocrit is 75% of the baseline hematocrit. At this point, if the serum ferritin concentration is ≥50 ng/mL despite a significant reduction in hematocrit, the interval at which phlebotomy is performed needs to be spaced further apart. Once the serum ferritin concentration is ≤100 ng/mL, serum ferritin concentration should be quantified in all affected individuals after each additional one or two treatments [Barton et al 1998]. The serum ferritin concentration is the most reliable and inexpensive way to monitor therapeutic phlebotomy. Maintenance therapy is aimed at maintaining serum ferritin concentration <50 ng/mL and transferrin-iron saturation <50%. On average, men require removal of twice as many units of blood as women. Subsequent phlebotomies to prevent reaccumulation of iron can be carried out approximately every three to four months for men and once or twice a year for women. Iron chelation therapy is not recommended unless an individual has an elevated serum ferritin concentration and concomitant anemia that makes therapeutic phlebotomy impossible. However, this is uncommon in individuals with HFE-HH. Therapeutic phlebotomy improves fibrosis except in cases of cirrhosis [Powell et al 2006]. Orthotopic liver transplantation is the only treatment for end-stage liver disease from decompensated cirrhosis. However, the post-transplant survival among untreated individuals with HFE-HH is poor [Crawford et al 2004, Kowdley et al 2005]. Although one study suggested that outcomes may have improved, this report did not enroll persons with documented HFE-HH but rather used a database [Yu & Ioannou 2007].

Biochemical 

Both the EASL and AASLD guidelines recommend therapeutic phlebotomy for persons with biochemical HFE-HH (i.e., those who have increased body iron stores in the absence of clinical evidence of iron overload). See European Association for the Study of the Liver [2010] (full text) and Bacon et al [2011] (full text). The exact serum ferritin concentration at which therapeutic phlebotomy should be initiated is not clear, the European Association for Study of Liver suggests performing phlebotomy once serum ferritin concentration is higher than 500 ng/mL.

Non-Expressing p.Cys282Tyr Homozygotes

These individuals do not have iron overload and thus do not need phlebotomy.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with iron overload should be advised against ingestion of shellfish or raw fish. Vaccination against hepatitis A and B is advised [Tavill 2001].

Surveillance



Clinical HFE-HH

Once the serum ferritin concentration is <50 ng/mL, monitor serum ferritin concentration every three to four months. It is reasonable to perform follow-up T2* MRI for assessment of cardiac iron among persons with a history of cardiac involvement or known cardiac iron deposition. Since cirrhosis is a crucial stage in the natural history of hemochromatosis, the diagnosis of cirrhosis is important because management changes. Individuals with cirrhosis should be followed regularly and screened for hepatocellular cancer (HCC) [Tavill 2001]. The AASLD Practice Guidelines recommend imaging every six months with good ultrasonography [Sherman 2010]. This may be accompanied with measurement of alpha fetoprotein. Noninvasive methods that use results derived from values of serum markers such as HepaScore® and FibroMeter™ can also be used to assess the stage of liver fibrosis [Martínez et al 2011]. Although the gold standard for the diagnosis of cirrhosis is biopsy, FibroScan® has been shown to have good sensitivity and specificity for cirrhosis [Tsochatzis et al 2011]. FibroScan (also known as transient elastography) quantifies fibrosis with ultrasound in a non-invasive manner [Tsochatzis et al 2011]. The results from a meta-analysis suggested a cut-off value for diagnosis of cirrhosis of 13.01 kPa [Friedrich-Rust et al 2008]. Individuals with normal transient elastography (TE) values on FibroScan would not need a biopsy while individuals with intermediate or high TE values should have biopsies to confirm cirrhosis. These results should be interpreted in conjunction with clinical and biochemical parameters. Note: The AASLD Guidelines recommend that individuals with cirrhosis undergo surveillance regardless of whether or not they have been iron depleted [Bacon et al 2011] (full text).

Biochemical HFE-HH

Begin annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration when ferritin concentration exceeds normal levels [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010] (full text).

Non-Expressing p.Cys282Tyr Homozygotes

Begin annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration when ferritin concentration exceeds normal levels [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following: Medicinal iron, mineral supplements, excess vitamin C, and uncooked seafood Alcohol consumption in those with hepatic involvement

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the status of apparently asymptomatic adult sibs and offspring of individuals homozygous for p.Cys282Tyr in order to identify those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures. The following strategy is appropriate: Offer molecular genetic testing to the adult sibs of an individual homozygous for p.Cys282Tyr. Perform iron studies (i.e., transferrin iron saturation and serum concentration of ferritin) on those sibs who are homozygous for p.Cys282Tyr. Begin phlebotomy therapy if serum ferritin concentration is elevated above the upper limits of normal and if the proband has clinical HFE-HH. Note: Sibs of probands with clinical HFE-HH appear to have a higher prevalence of clinical HFE-HH than asymptomatic individuals detected through screening programs. Note: Genotype-based testing has been found to be cost effective in most individuals because it has excellent negative predictive value. However, genotype-based testing has a low positive predictive value because many p.Cys282Tyr homozygotes and compound heterozygotes will not express the disease [El-Serag et al 2000, Beutler et al 2002]. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No guidelines exist; common practice is to withhold phlebotomy during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

The oral iron chelator, deferasirox (Exjade®) has been studied in a Phase I/II study in patients with hemochromatosis. Final results of this trial suggest that deferasirox is effective at reducing iron burden within an acceptable safety profile [Phatak et al 2010]. It has not yet been approved for use in treating hemochromatosis. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.