

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with hepatoerythropoietic porphyria (HEP), the following evaluations are recommended: Evaluation for excess hepatic iron Targeted analysis for HFE pathogenic variants (see HFE-related familial hemochromatosis) Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 There are no effective treatment regimens to restore enzyme levels in individuals with HEP. Hence, treatment recommendations at this time are similar to the ones for familial porphyria cutanea tarda (F-PCT): the avoidance of sunlight, including the long-wave ultraviolet light sunlight that passes through window glass.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 The following measures are recommended: Protection from sunlight because of the high risk for severe skin damage and possible mutilation Identification and avoidance of susceptibility factors (where applicable) . See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid. Avoidance of drugs and agents that induce the hepatic P450 Vaccination against hepatitis A and B

Surveillance

 There are currently no recommendations or guidelines for surveillance in those with HEP.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Persons of all ages should avoid exposure to sunlight. Older individuals should avoid the known precipitating factors (e.g., alcohol, oral estrogen, smoking, and drugs that induce the cytochrome P450s).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 If the family-specific UROD pathogenic variants are known, it is reasonable to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives so that those with biallelic UROD pathogenic variants can be counseled regarding sun protection and avoidance of known susceptibility factors. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.