http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hfg

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with hand-foot-genital syndrome (HFGS), the following evaluations are recommended: Physical examination and radiographs of the hands and feet to evaluate for characteristic abnormalities (e.g., small thumbs, fifth-finger clinodactyly) that may affect hand function Urologic assessment of bladder/ureter function and urethral competence or position, including renal ultrasound examination and voiding cystourethrogram; examination for UPJ obstruction Gynecologic examination prior to menstruation or pregnancy for evidence of incomplete Müllerian fusion, longitudinal vaginal septum, or extremely small hymenal opening. Evaluation may include ultrasound, hysterosalpingogram, hysteroscopy, sonohysterogram, MRI, or other imaging studies. Such studies could be accomplished at the same time as urologic imaging. Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Urologic referral is indicated. Appropriate treatment includes surgical correction of bladder outlet abnormalities and ureteric implantation. Gynecologic referral is indicated. Surgical removal of longitudinal vaginal septum is rarely indicated, even in anticipation of labor. Surgery for removal of a uterine septum or reunification of a bicornuate uterus is likewise exceptional in the absence of recurrent mid-trimester pregnancy losses. Hymenectomy may be necessary for tight constriction ring. Usually, extremity surgery is not necessary, although repair of hallux varus and tarsal fusion [Verp et al 1983] have been reported.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 The following are appropriate: Prophylactic antibiotics or surgery as needed to prevent urinary tract infections or other complications of ureteral reflux or UPJ obstruction Gynecologic examination prior to menstruation for small hymenal opening Pre-pregnancy evaluation of the vaginal and uterine anatomy because of the increased risk for premature labor and fetal loss associated with structural abnormalities of the uterus

Surveillance

 Follow-up with a urologist in the presence of vesicoureteral reflux and/or documented urinary tract infection is warranted.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Physical examination of relatives and HOXA13 sequence analysis will help identify those at risk of genitourinary and reproductive tract complications. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 In women with HFGS, premature pregnancy loss is possible secondary to uterine malformation. Consultation with an obstetrician before pregnancy is recommended and should include evaluation for and discussion of potential pregnancy complications. Affected fetuses are generally healthy, but could be at risk for premature birth secondary to maternal uterine malformation if the mother is also affected.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.