

Management

 The IGCLC has updated consensus guidelines for clinical management of individuals with a CDH1 pathogenic variant [Fitzgerald et al 2010] (full text).

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer, the following evaluations are recommended: Baseline endoscopy to look for macroscopic tumor [Fitzgerald et al 2010] Evaluation of CDH1 heterozygotes for H. pylori infection given its ability to induce promoter hypermethylation of CDH1 and its role in GC carcinogenesis Breast examination/mammography in females Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Care by a multidisciplinary team comprising those with expertise in clinical genetics, gastric surgery, gastroenterology, pathology, and nutrition is recommended [Fitzgerald et al 2010] (see full text and Figure 1 therein). H. pylori infection (if present) is treated in the standard manner. The primary curative treatment of gastric cancer is surgical resection. Regardless of the surgical procedure used for the treatment of gastric cancer, the effectiveness of surgical resection is poor if the ultimate goal is increased cure rate: studies have shown that surgery alone is less than satisfactory in the management of early gastric cancer, with cure rates approaching only 40%. The role of adjuvant therapy was indefinite until three large, randomized controlled trials showed the survival benefit of adjuvant therapy over surgery alone [Macdonald et al 2000, Cunningham et al 2006, Sakuramoto et al 2007]. Numerous randomized clinical trials have failed to show consistent survival benefits from adjuvant radiation therapy or chemotherapy alone in the treatment of gastric cancer.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Biopsy-proven diffuse-type gastric carcinoma. Prophylactic total gastrectomy is recommended if a biopsy shows diffuse-type gastric carcinoma [Chun et al 2001, Fitzgerald et al 2010]. Heterozygotes for a germline CDH1 pathogenic variant. The importance of identifying the genetic basis of cancer susceptibility in families with HDGC has been underscored by the observation of early gastric cancers in prophylactic total gastrectomy (PTG) samples obtained from individuals with a germline CDH1 pathogenic variant [Chun et al 2001, Huntsman et al 2001, Norton et al 2007]. These findings suggest that currently prophylactic total gastrectomy, rather than endoscopic surveillance, is the best preventive measure for individuals who have a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant. Prophylactic total gastrectomy (PTG) involves D-2 dissection and Roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy and obtaining proximal margins to ensure removal of the gastric mucosa [Norton et al 2007]. In a young, healthy individual, the risk of mortality with PTG in an experienced surgeon’s hands is less than 1% [Lynch et al 2005]. However, the morbidity from prophylactic gastrectomy is high. All individuals have long-term morbidity related to both immediate post-surgical complications as well as long-term complications including rapid intestinal transit, dumping syndrome, diarrhea, eating habit alterations, and weight loss [Caldas et al 1999, Lewis et al 2001]. In addition, the risk for malabsorption increases after total gastrectomy; malabsorption accounts for the increased incidence of osteoporosis, osteomalacia, and malnutrition described in persons with gastric cancer [Liedman 1999]. In light of these possible complications, it is recommended that a multidisciplinary team including a surgeon, gastroenterologist, and dietician provide preoperative and postoperative care for an individual undergoing PTG. The multidisciplinary team members can counsel candidates for PTG on the risks and benefits of the surgery. In making the decision to undergo PTG, the affected individual and his/her physicians should consider the following: The age-specific risks of gastric cancer. Due to nutritional implications, PTG is not generally recommended until the individual’s growth period is complete. In families in which gastric cancer is early onset, PTG should be considered on a case by case basis [Blair et al 2006]. In these individuals, regular endoscopic screening may be begun prior to the consideration of PTG. The 100% morbidity of gastrectomy and the 1% risk of mortality following the surgery The risk in individuals with a CDH1 pathogenic variant of developing extragastric cancers (e.g., lobular breast cancer and colorectal cancer) and the screening recommendations for these cancers Breast cancer. Referral to a high-risk breast clinic is recommended [Fitzgerald et al 2010]. Prophylactic mastectomy may be considered in women heterozygous for a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant. The authors are aware of only a handful of women who have to date undergone prophylactic mastectomy for this reason. It is important to note that prophylactic mastectomy can have psychological effects; appropriate counseling should include the possible altered perception of the body and sexual relationships [Lodder et al 2002, Brandberg et al 2008].

Surveillance



Gastric Cancer

 Although it has been proposed that individuals who have a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant undergo routine surveillance for gastric cancer, the optimal management of individuals at risk for a gastric cancer is controversial because of the unproven value of surveillance regime. In most cases, the gastric cancer is not detected until it reaches an incurable, advanced stage. Samples obtained at the time of prophylactic gastrectomy of six asymptomatic individuals with a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant revealed occult disease on microscopic analysis even though each individual had had normal screening tests prior to surgery [Norton et al 2007]. Due to the highly penetrant nature of HDGC caused by a germline CDH1 pathogenic variant, it is recommended that at-risk individuals who are not ready to undergo PTG or who have declined it be screened every six to 12 months by upper endoscopy with multiple random biopsies [Norton et al 2007, Barber et al 2008, Fitzgerald et al 2010] (full text). Screening should begin five to ten years prior to the earliest cancer diagnosis in the family. Several screening modalities have been tested: Endoscopy. The effectiveness of endoscopy (currently the only method in use) in detecting the early lesions of gastric cancer has not been proven. Endoscopy permits direct inspection and biopsy of suspicious areas; however, diffuse gastric cancer is difficult to detect at an early, treatable stage because the lesions tend to spread in the submucosa rather than as exophytic masses. The submucosal lesions are difficult to identify; an additional challenge is sampling bias in a macroscopically normal-appearing gastric mucosa [Fitzgerald & Caldas 2004, Norton et al 2007]. It is recommended that individuals at risk who do not wish to have prophylactic gastrectomy undergo a detailed 30-minute endoscopic examination of the gastric mucosa with multiple random biopsies and biopsies of subtle lesions at six- to 12-month intervals [Caldas et al 1999]. Chromoendoscopy, using indigo-carmine staining, has been shown to improve the detection rate of early gastric cancer [Stepp et al 1998, Fennerty 1999]. Charlton et al [2004] studied six stomachs removed prophylactically after macroscopically normal gastric endoscopies. A pH-sensitive Congo red dye followed by pentagastric stimulation revealed signet ring foci that were five times more prevalent in the transitional zone of the distal stomach, a finding in contrast with other studies [Carneiro et al 2004]. The transitional zone occupies less than 10% of the stomach and lacks gastric-secreting G cells. The authors suggest that chromoendoscopy using Congo red dye and pentagastric stimulation may highlight this area during endoscopy and thus increase the chances of detecting cancer foci. Further research is needed to evaluate this possibility. The same group of investigators reported a year later on a follow up of 99 surveillance endoscopies over five years [Shaw et al 2005]: 69 of 99 (70%) endoscopies were normal. 23 lesions with signet ring cell cancer were identified in ten individuals. The Congo red/methylene blue dye detected foci between 4 and 10 mm, not less than 4 mm. These findings need to be evaluated in a larger group of heterozygotes for a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant. However, concerns over the toxicity of Congo red have precluded the use of this stain in chromoendoscopy. Endoscopic ultrasound examination is important in the detection and staging of gastrointestinal cancers [Pfau & Chak 2002], but is not believed to be useful in detecting precursor lesions [Fitzgerald & Caldas 2004]. Other. Several other tools utilized include PET scan [van Kouwen et al 2004], endoscopic ultrasound, stool for guaiac, abdominal CT, and multiple random stomach biopsies [Barber et al 2008]. However, none of these reliably detects DGC, as demonstrated by the finding – one week after a number of these screening investigations were performed – of multiple small cancer foci in six of six gastrectomy specimens from individuals who were heterozygous for a CDH1 pathogenic variant [Norton et al 2007].

Lobular Breast Cancer (LBC)

 Currently the data on women with germline CDH1 pathogenic variants and development of lobular breast cancer are insufficient to determine the best cancer screening strategies. Recommendations for LBC risk management in CDH1 heterozygotes or at-risk women are based on recommendations for women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline pathogenic variant (see BRCA1 and BRCA2 Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer). At-risk women should undergo regular breast screening as determined by their physicians, including monthly breast self-examinations and a clinical breast examination every six months. Because lobular breast cancer is often difficult to diagnose on clinical examination and mammography, it may also be prudent to refer a woman who has a CDH1 germline pathogenic variant to a high-risk breast cancer screening program and to consider use of MRI, which appears to be more sensitive than mammography in detecting tumors in such women [Schelfout et al 2004; Lehman 2006; Schelfout, personal communication]. The screening should begin by age 35 years or five to ten years prior to the youngest age of breast cancer diagnosis in the family [Fitzgerald et al 2010].

Colon Cancer

 Although evidence is insufficient to conclude that colon cancer is a manifestation of HDGC, it is prudent to recommend colonoscopy every three to five years beginning at age 40 years or ten years prior to the youngest age at diagnosis of colon cancer in families in which both DGC and colon cancer have occurred [Fitzgerald et al 2010].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to at-risk relatives if the CDH1 pathogenic variant is identified in an affected family member, so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment. See Genetic Counseling, Testing of asymptomatic at-risk individuals younger than age 18 years for discussion of issues related to testing of this population. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Testing of Populations at Risk

 In Japan, where the prevalence of gastric cancer is high, a mass population screening program allows for successful detection of early disease by endoscopy [Shiratori et al 1985]. In this program, all suspicious findings seen on endoscopy are biopsied and evaluated histologically. Suspicious findings include minute changes in the color of the mucosa, altered vascular pattern, roughened surface, flat lesions, and minor mucosal irregularities.

Pregnancy Management

 Evidence shows that pregnancy after PTG can have healthy and normal outcomes. Kaurah et al [2010] discussed six healthy pregnancies and infants born to four women after total gastrectomy. However, it is important that women who have undergone PTG and are pregnant be followed closely by their physician and a dietician who is aware of the situation.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.