http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hgps

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS), the following evaluations are recommended: Weight and height plotted on standard growth charts to evaluate growth over time Baseline electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiogram Baseline carotid artery duplex scans to evaluate size of the lumen and intimal thickness in order to establish baseline vascular status Baseline MRI/MRA of the brain and neck Skeletal x-ray to evaluate for characteristic findings: acroosteolysis, clavicular resorption, coxa valga, and extraskeletal soft tissue calcifications [Cleveland et al 2012] Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) to assess bone mineral density. Note: This must be normalized for height-age [Gordon et al 2011]. Standard goniometry to assess joint mobility; physical therapy and occupational therapy assessments Nutritional assessment Audiologic, ophthalmologic, and dental examinations Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 A complete, system-based management guide is available from the Progeria Research Foundation. No evidence that a low-cholesterol, low-fat, or other special diet influences the course of progeria exists. Thus, a regular diet is indicated unless the lipid profile becomes abnormal, at which point appropriate treatment includes exercise, diet modification, and medication as warranted. Frequent small meals tend to maximize caloric intake. Stiffened peripheral vasculature may be less tolerant to dehydration; therefore maintaining optimal hydration orally is recommended. Shoe pads are recommended, as lack of body fat leads to foot discomfort. Use of sunscreen on all exposed areas of skin, including the head, is recommended for outdoor activities. Prior to decline in cardiovascular or neurologic status (resulting from strokes, angina, or heart attacks), children should be encouraged to be as physically active as possible, taking into account possible limitations related to restricted range of motion of joints and hip problems including osteoarthritis and hip dislocation. Because intellect and maturity are normal, age-appropriate schooling is usually indicated. Infections are generally handled as for unaffected children. Medications. Dosages should be based on body weight or body surface area and not on age. Anesthetics should be used with particular caution. Nitroglycerin is frequently of benefit if angina develops. Routine anticongestive therapy is appropriate if congestive heart failure is present. Statins are recommended for their putative effect on farnesylation inhibition. Anticoagulation is warranted if vascular blockage, transient ischemic attacks, stroke, angina, or myocardial infarction occur. Injuries. Wound healing is normal. Fracture rate is equivalent to the general pediatric population. When children do fracture, treatment and healing are routine. Hips. Conservative management of hip dislocation with physical therapy and body bracing and avoidance of surgical procedures on bones are recommended when possible. Teeth. Extraction of primary teeth may be required to avoid crowding and development of two rows of teeth. Since secondary teeth may erupt slowly or not at all, pulling primary teeth to make room for secondary teeth should be performed after secondary teeth have fully or almost fully or almost fully descended. Once the primary tooth has been extracted, the secondary tooth often moves into the appropriate position with time. General anesthesia and intubation should be performed with extreme caution, ideally with fiberoptic intubation, if possible. Individuals with HGPS may have a narrow and unusually shaped airway; additionally, they may exhibit an extreme sensitivity to alterations in blood pressure due to vascular stiffness. Physical therapy. Routine physical and occupational therapy is recommended to help maintain range of motion in large and small (i.e., finger) joints; see Physical Therapy and Occupational Therapy in Progeria (pdf). Active stretching and strengthening, along with hydrotherapy, are recommended. Podiatric evaluation is indicated to determine if shoe inserts are needed Eye care. Corneal dryness, clouding or ulceration should be fully evaluated by an ophthalmologist. Exposure keratitis primarily caused by nocturnal lagophthalmos can be treated during daytime with ocular lubication and during sleep with moisturizing ointment or by closing eyelids with skin tape. Hearing loss. Hearing aids can be used, when clinically necessary.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Aspirin. Based on the evidence from adult studies that low doses of aspirin help delay heart attacks and strokes, it is probably appropriate to give children with HGPS low-dose aspirin treatment, at doses of 2-3 mg/kg body weight per day. Note: If chicken pox or influenza is prevalent in the community, it may be advisable to discontinue the aspirin during that time because of the increased risk of Reye syndrome. Adequate oral hydration is recommended, as the vasculature becomes generally less pliable and the risks of stroke and cardiac complications increase over time due to decreased vascular compensation. This is especially important during hot weather or airplane travel. Vitamin supplementation. Standard amounts of ordinary multiple vitamin tablets are appropriate. Fluoride supplements are recommended in areas where needed. Immunizations. The routine doses and administration schedule for all immunizations are recommended. Immunizations are generally handled as for unaffected children.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: ECG, measurement of blood pressure, echocardiogram, and carotid duplex scans annually or semi-annually to monitor for cardiovascular disease. Note: Children may experience severe carotid artery atherosclerotic blockage prior to any significant ECG changes. Annually: Neurologic assessment MRI/MRA of head and neck to assess for vascular changes and silent strokes, which are true strokes that do not result in any clinical symptoms Lipid profiles Dental examination, x-ray, and cleaning Hip x-rays to evaluate for avascular necrosis and progressing coxa valga Dual x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) and/or peripheral cutaneous computed tomography scan of spine, hips, and total body to assess bone density and body fat composition Physical therapy and occupational therapy assessment for joint contractures and activities of daily living Complete audiologic assessment with special attention to possible low-frequency conductive hearing loss Complete ophthalmologic examination with special attention to possible exposure keratopathy

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Children should avoid being in the midst of large crowds with much taller and larger peers because of the increased risk of injury. Physical activity should be self-limited.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search HGPS or progeria within ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical trials for HGPS. The three therapies currently under human clinical trial investigation for HGPS include: lonafarnib, pravastatin, and zoledronate. For each of these drugs, the target action in HGPS is to inhibit post-translational farnesylation of progerin, the active disease-causing protein in HGPS (see Figure 1): Lonafarnib is an investigational farnesyltransferase inhibitor. Pravastatin inhibits HMG-CoA reductase. Zoledronate is a bisphosphonate that inhibits farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase. Three clinical trials have been conducted: lonafarnib monotherapy; lonafarnib in combination with pravastatin and zoledronate; and pravastatin and zoledronate administered as combination therapy: Clinical trial results for lonafarnib have revealed improvement in the rate of weight gain, vascular distensibility as measured via pulse wave velocity and vascular echodensity, bone rigidity, neurosensory hearing [Gordon et al 2012], headaches [Ullrich et al 2013], and life span [Gordon et al 2014]. Trial results for pravastatin and zoledronate are not yet known. Treatments proposed through preclinical studies but not tested in humans: Rapamycin improved cellular phenotypes in HGPS fibroblasts via increased autophagy [Cao et al 2011, Cenni et al 2011] and extends life span in a lamin A-deficient mouse model. Antisense oligonucleotides [Osorio et al 2011] reduced progerin protein levels, enhanced life expectancy, improved disease phenotype, and improved cellular phenotypes in an HGPS mouse model. Resveratrol [Liu et al 2012] improves the cellular phenotype in HGPS fibroblasts, improves lamin A function via a SIRT-1 dependent manner and extends life span in a Zmpste24-/- mouse model. Nat10 inhibition by a chemical named remodelin that is not yet developed for clinical use corrected phenotypes in HGPS fibroblasts [Larrieu et al 2014].