http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hhhs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with the hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Neurocognitive evaluation of the affected individual including brain imaging Evaluation of school performance with attention to possible learning disabilities

Treatment of Manifestations

Of primary importance in the management of individuals with HHH syndrome is rapid control of the hyperammonemic episodes that may result from changes in diet (e.g., protein intake), infection, fasting, or injury, or have no apparent cause. Long-term management of affected individuals focuses on the prevention of episodes of hyperammonemia and attempts to lower the level of plasma ornithine concentration. It is critical that the acute and long-term management of individuals with HHH syndrome be performed in conjunction with a metabolic specialist. Treatment of acute hyperammonemic episodes. Assess plasma ammonia concentration, complete chemistry panel, arterial blood gases (ABGs), CBC and differential (to evaluate for an infectious process), urinalysis, urine and plasma amino acids, and urine orotic acid. Plasma ammonia concentrations ≥100-125 μmol/L (~2 times control values) should be treated immediately. Discontinue all oral intake until the patient’s condition is stabilized because vomiting may be induced by hyperammonemia and/or some of the drugs given intravenously to promote ammonia removal (e.g., as part of nitrogen scavenging therapy). This approach also stops all protein intake. Initial intravenous infusion should be 10% dextrose (with 1/4 normal saline and 20mEq/liter KCl) at twice maintenance; ammonia and glucose/Na/K/Cl/CO2 concentrations should be monitored every two hours or when neurologic status changes. It is important to note that patients respond neurologically differently to rising ammonia concentrations: an individual with HHH syndrome is more likely to respond to the initial IV infusion of dextrose and to normalize his/her plasma ammonia concentration when compared to an individual with a urea cycle disorder such as OTC deficiency or ASS deficiency. If clinical status does not improve, infusion of supplemental arginine and ammonia removal drugs is added to the regimen. Follow published protocols for treatment of acute hyperammonemic episodes similar to those instituted for OTC deficiency [Brusilow & Horwich 2001]. These protocols consist of arginine supplementation and use of intravenous bolus and maintenance infusions of the ammonia removal drugs sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate. The New England Consortium of Metabolic Programs has a complete set of treatment protocols and algorithms that are freely available and easily accessible. An initial priming dose of arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate is given (see Table 3).


Table 3. 

Initial Priming Dose of Arginine, Benzoate, and Phenylacetate by Age Group




Infusion 1
Infants and Children
Adolescents and Adults




10% arginine HCl
210 mg/kg/day
4.0 g/m2


Sodium benzoate
250 mg/kg/day
5.5 g/m2


Sodium phenylacetate
250 mg/kg/day
5.5 g/m2





1. 
Mix solutions of arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate in a 10% dextrose solution at a dose of 25 mL of 10% dextrose/kg and infuse over 90 min. The solutions containing arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate should be given in conjunction with 10% dextrose + one quarter normal saline + 20 mEq/L KCL solution.

Initial Priming Dose of Arginine, Benzoate, and Phenylacetate by Age Group Mix solutions of arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate in a 10% dextrose solution at a dose of 25 mL of 10% dextrose/kg and infuse over 90 min. The solutions containing arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate should be given in conjunction with 10% dextrose + one quarter normal saline + 20 mEq/L KCL solution. If ammonia levels stabilize, the same arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate solution is infused over 24 hrs. Note: All preparations of arginine and ammonia removal drugs should be double- or triple-checked given the potential for drug intoxication if high doses are given or continued CNS ammonia toxicity if low doses are given. If sodium benzoate or sodium phenylacetate solutions are not available, infusion of arginine should be started.


Table 4. 

Mechanisms of Drug Action in Treatment of Hyperammonemia




Drug
Action




Glucose



Raises insulin levels


Induces anabolic state


Causes protein sparing effect from skeletal muscle amino acids






Arginine 1



Needs to be supplemented in those with a urea cycle disorder


Stimulates secretion of insulin


Plays a role in the first step of the synthesis of creatine 2






Sodium benzoate 3



Forms benzoate-glycine (hippurate) via the benzoylCoA:glycine acyltransferase reaction 4


Eliminates one amino group in the urine






Sodium phenylacetate 3



Forms a phenylacetate-glutamine compound via the phenylacetateCoA:glutamine acetyl-transferase reaction 4


Eliminates two amino groups in the urine








1. 
A non-essential amino acid in humans


2. 
Interruption in the synthesis of brain creatine secondary to hyperammonemia has been proposed as a contributing factor to the neurologic findings in affected individuals.


3. 
Initially esterified to its CoA-ester via the medium chain fatty acid enzyme, acyl-CoA ligase


4. 
Reaction takes place in the mitochondrial matrix (liver and kidney) [Brusilow & Horwich 2001]

Mechanisms of Drug Action in Treatment of Hyperammonemia Raises insulin levels Induces anabolic state Causes protein sparing effect from skeletal muscle amino acids Needs to be supplemented in those with a urea cycle disorder Stimulates secretion of insulin Plays a role in the first step of the synthesis of creatine 2 Forms benzoate-glycine (hippurate) via the benzoylCoA:glycine acyltransferase reaction 4 Eliminates one amino group in the urine Forms a phenylacetate-glutamine compound via the phenylacetateCoA:glutamine acetyl-transferase reaction 4 Eliminates two amino groups in the urine A non-essential amino acid in humans Interruption in the synthesis of brain creatine secondary to hyperammonemia has been proposed as a contributing factor to the neurologic findings in affected individuals. Initially esterified to its CoA-ester via the medium chain fatty acid enzyme, acyl-CoA ligase Reaction takes place in the mitochondrial matrix (liver and kidney) [Brusilow & Horwich 2001] Hemodialysis. If the patient fails to respond to the above treatment of hyperammonemia, if the plasma ammonia concentration increases, and/or if the neurologic status deteriorates, hemodialysis should be started promptly to remove ammonia from the circulation. Infusion of arginine, benzoate, and phenylacetate should continue during hemodialysis. Dialysis may be prolonged if the catabolic state persists. Nutrition. Twenty-four to 36 hours after initial admission the patient should start receiving intravenous alimentation including daily doses of only essential amino acids, carnitine, vitamins, and lipids to help avoid a catabolic state which will prolong hyperammonemia. Note: Non-essential amino acids (i.e., glutamine, proline, and glycine) should be avoided since they increase the nitrogen load to an already compromised urea cycle.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Depending on their age, individuals with HHH syndrome should be maintained on a protein-restricted diet. For infants and children the dietary protein needs to be restricted to control hyperammonemia, but sufficient for normal growth and development. Dietary supplementation with Cyclinex®-1 (infants and children) or Cyclinex®-2 (adult) formulas that provide only essential amino acids and other nutritional supplements have been helpful for some affected individuals. Citrulline supplementation at 0.17 g/kg/day or 3.8 g/m2/day is preferred to arginine because citrulline accepts an aspartate (via the arginosuccinate synthase reaction) and therefore eliminates two amino groups per cycle. Moreover, there may be a possible association between arginine supplementation and progression of lower limb spasticity [HHH International Round Table, Roma 2006, unpublished]. Sodium phenylbutyrate (Buphenyl®) is given at 450-600 mg/kg/day in three divided doses. Sodium phenylbutyrate initially is imported into the mitochondria where it undergoes β-oxidation to produce phenylacetate. Lysine supplementation is indicated when plasma lysine concentrations are low. Low plasma lysine concentrations have been associated with delayed growth and development. Plasma concentrations of ammonia, glutamine, arginine, and essential amino acids should be maintained within the normal range. Note: (1) Although elevated plasma ornithine concentrations may decrease significantly if dietary management is followed, complete normalization of plasma ornithine concentration is rarely observed. (2) Even in the absence of hyperammonemic episodes, affected individuals may continue to develop neurologic complications such as spasticity or learning disabilities. Maintaining as low a level of plasma ornithine concentration as possible by restricting protein intake could help prevent some of the progressive neurologic complications seen in these individuals. Liver transplantation is not indicated for persons with HHH syndrome. Because SLC25A15 and the ornithine degradation pathway are expressed in all tissues (i.e., brain, kidney) and most cell types (i.e., astrocytes, fibroblasts), liver transplantation may correct the hyperammonemia, but it will not correct tissue-specific metabolic abnormalities that also contribute to the neurologic pathology. Three individuals with HHH syndrome who had acute fulminant hepatic failure and coagulopathy rapidly stabilized after protein restriction and arginine or citrulline supplementation [Fecarotta et al 2006, Mhanni et al 2008].

Surveillance

All surveillance of patients with HHH syndrome should be a combined effort of the general pediatrician or adult practitioner and a metabolic specialist. Height, weight, and head circumference should be assessed routinely in children from the time of diagnosis to adolescence. Plasma ammonia concentration, plasma and urine amino acid concentrations, urine organic acids, and urine orotic acid need to be monitored routinely, based on age and history of compliance and metabolic decompensation. Low plasma concentrations of essential amino acids could trigger a catabolic state, requiring readjustment of the diet/formulas. Low plasma concentrations of lysine may lead to delays in growth and development in infants. Parents of infants and small children should be alert to subtle changes in mood, behavior, and eating and/or the onset of vomiting, which may suggest that plasma concentrations of glutamine and ammonia are increasing. School performance should be monitored since poor school performance may lead to low self-esteem and/or behavioral problems that could influence compliance with a protein-restricted diet. Periodic neurologic evaluation is warranted to monitor for neurologic deterioration even when metabolic control is optimal.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following: Excess dietary protein intake Non-prescribed protein supplements such as those used to increase size of skeletal muscle during exercise regimens Prolonged fasting during an illness or weight loss Use of intravenous steroids Valproic acid, which exacerbates hyperammonemia in urea cycle disorders Exposure to communicable diseases

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variants in a family are known, use molecular genetic testing to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives to allow for early diagnosis and treatment, perhaps even before symptoms occur. Note: Plasma concentrations of ornithine and urinary excretion of orotic acid and homocitrulline may be unreliable in asymptomatic persons. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy in a woman with HHH syndrome has not been published. Rebecca Mardach, MD (Kaiser Permanente, Los Angeles) provided information to the authors about a healthy boy born after an uneventful pregnancy to a clinically asymptomatic woman in her early 20s who had been diagnosed with HHH syndrome at age 13 years in the course of evaluation of her affected five-year-old sib [Camacho et al 2006]. During her pregnancy the mother was maintained on a protein and citrulline regimen that allowed normal fetal development and maternal health; plasma and urine amino acids, orotic acid, plasma ammonia, and urine organic acids were monitored. There are no well-controlled epidemiologic studies of the fetal effects of sodium benzoate, phenylacetate, or phenylbutyrate during human pregnancy. However, sodium benzoate has been reported to lead to malformations and neurotoxicity/nephrotoxicity in zebrafish larvae [Tsay et al 2007] and to possible teratogenicity in rats [Minor & Becker 1971, Onodera et al 1978]. As a known differentiating agent, sodium phenylbutyrate also functions as a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor with potential teratogenicity given its ability to alter gene expression in fetal mice [Di Renzo et al 2007]. The FDA has assigned sodium benzoate and sodium phenylacetate to pregnancy category C (“potential benefits may warrant use of the drug in pregnant women despite potential risks”). Theoretically, the use of benzoate/phenylacetate and in particular sodium phenylbutyrate should be avoided during pregnancy, especially during the first trimester. The use of these medications should be carefully evaluated for each individual (benefit/risk ratio) in consultation with a metabolic genetics specialist. Despite the report of successful administration of sodium phenybutyrate to an OTC-deficient woman throughout her 11- to 33-week gestation period, caution is advised and the alternate use of sodium benzoate, if deemed necessary, is recommended [Redonnet-Vernhet et al 2000]. Mendez-Figueroa et al [2010] reported a small number of females with OTC deficiency who successfully completed their pregnancies without need of ammonia removal medications. This study also reported the use of sodium benzoate to manage a pregnant woman with OTC deficiency who developed mild hyperammonemia during induction of labor. No specialized care for a fetus known to have HHH syndrome is warranted.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.