http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hht

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT), the following evaluations are recommended [Faughnan et al 2011, McDonald et al 2011a]: Medical history, with particular attention to epistaxis and other bleeding, anemia or polycythemia, diseases of the heart, lung and liver, and neurologic symptoms Physical examination including inspection for telangiectases (particularly on fingers, lips, tongue, oropharynx, cheeks, or conjunctiva) and listening for abdominal bruits Complete blood count, with particular attention to anemia or polycythemia. If anemia is present, it is important to consider other causes of anemia, particularly when the anemia appears to be disproportionate to the amount of epistaxis. People with HHT may develop medical problems unrelated to HHT (e.g., ulcers or colon cancer) that can cause GI blood loss. Polycythemia raises suspicion for pulmonary arteriovenous malformations. Contrast echocardiography for detection of pulmonary shunting/AVM and measurement of the pulmonary artery systolic pressure as a screen for pulmonary artery hypertension. When pulmonary shunting is suggested (or if dependable contrast echocardiography is not available), CT angiography with cuts of 3 mm or less to define size and location of lesions(s) is the next step. Head MRI (with and without gadolinium) to detect cerebral AVMs, performed as early as possible, preferably in the first year of life. Adults, including those screened with MRI in infancy, should all have a screening head MRI to detect unsuspected vascular lesions and occult cerebral abscesses. Consideration of ultrasound or CT examination for evidence of hepatic AVM if the individual has symptoms such as high-output failure associated with hepatic vascular abnormalities or otherwise unexplained elevations in liver function tests, or if presence of a visceral AVM would confirm a diagnosis of HHT Note: Screening for hepatic AVMs in asymptomatic individuals is not common practice because: Hepatic AVMs are not usually symptomatic and, when they do become symptomatic, it is not sudden and catastrophic, as is seen with pulmonary AVMs and cerebral AVMs; and Treatment options for hepatic AVMs are less satisfactory than those for pulmonary or cerebral AVMs. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Nosebleeds

 It is appropriate to consider intervention for nosebleeds in the case of anemia attributable to the nosebleeds or if an individual feels that the frequency or duration interferes significantly with normal activities. Humidification and the daily application of nasal lubricants may be helpful. Hemostatic products (gauze, sponge or powder products) available over the counter help individuals self-manage significant nosebleeds. Laser ablation typically done under general anesthesia may be the most effective intervention for control of mild to moderate nosebleeds. Office-based sclerotherapy was shown to be a potentially safe and useful alternative in an uncontrolled Spanish study [Morais et al 2012] and a small retrospective US pilot study [Boyer et al 2011]. Young's nasal closure is a consideration for severe epistaxis which has proven unresponsive to the above methods [Richer et al 2012]. Surgical treatment for severe epistaxis in persons with HHT should be performed by surgeons who treat people with HHT regularly. Oral drug therapy. A meta-analysis of studies of hormonal and anti-hormonal treatment concluded that estrogen-progesterone at doses used for oral contraception may eliminate bleeding in symptomatic HHT and is a reasonable initial option to consider for fertile women [Jameson & Cave 2004]. An anti-estrogen, tamoxifen, was reported to decrease nosebleeds in one series [Yaniv et al 2009]. Antifibrinolytic drugs such as tranexamic acid (Cyklokapron®) have been used with some success in selected individuals; the associated risks are not well established [Fernandez-L et al 2007]. Thalidomide, an angiogenesis inhibitor, reduced the severity and frequency of nosebleeds in six of seven affected individuals in a small series [Lebrin et al 2010]. Oral propranolol has also been suggested as a potential treatment [Albiñana et al 2012]. Topical drug therapy. Current evidence and experience suggest that the simple humidification and moisturizing effects of medicated sprays and ointments are more helpful than the particular medication. A multi-HHT center randomized, cross-over, placebo controlled trial (NOSE Trial) to study the efficacy of several medicated nose sprays (bevacizumab, estriol, and tranexamic acid) in the treatment of epistaxis concluded that all groups, including the placebo group using saline spray, had a significant improvement in epistaxis. None of the three topical therapies was any better at decreasing epistaxis frequency than twice-daily saline spray [Whitehead et al 2016]. Another randomized, multicenter, placebo-controlled clinical trial of three doses of bevacizumab nasal spray was published simultaneously with the NOSE Trial. Here again, topical bevacizumab had no effect on epistaxis [Dupuis-Girod et al 2016]. Case reports or small series suggest that these and other topically administered agents (e.g., timolol 0.5% ophthalmic solution) may help reduce the duration or frequency of nosebleeds in those with HHT [Flanagan et al 2012, Guldmann et al 2012, Olitsky 2012, Reh et al 2013]. Case reports and a small series [Bose et al 2009, Brinkerhoff et al 2011, Suppressa et al 2011, Dupuis-Girod et al 2012, Thompson et al 2014] suggest that IV administration of the anti-angiogenic drug bevacizumab may be efficacious in those with severe, intractable nosebleeds.

Gastrointestinal Bleeding

 Treatment is unnecessary unless aggressive iron therapy has been ineffective in maintaining hemoglobin concentration in the normal range. Endoscopy, capsule endoscopy, mesenteric and celiac angiography, and radionuclide studies may be used to localize the source of bleeding and its type [Grève et al 2010]. Endoscopic application of a heater probe, bicap, or laser is the mainstay of local treatment. Small bowel bleeding sites and larger vascular malformations can be removed surgically after they are identified by nuclear medicine studies. For severe GI bleeding associated with intractable iron deficiency anemia, various pharmacologic agents have shown promise based on case reports or small uncontrolled series. Treatment with oral estrogen-progesterone or tranexamic acid has decreased transfusion needs [Proctor et al 2008]. A number of single cases of dramatic reduction in GI bleeding after IV administration of the anti-angiogenic drug bevacizumab have been reported [Flieger et al 2006, Fodstad et al 2011].

Anemia

 Treatment of anemia with iron replacement and red blood cell transfusion, if necessary, is appropriate. Persons with iron deficiency who are intolerant of or do not respond to oral iron benefit from parenteral administration of iron.

Pulmonary AVMs

 Treatment of pulmonary AVMs is indicated for dyspnea, exercise intolerance, and hypoxemia, but is most important for prevention of lung hemorrhage and the neurologic complications of brain abscess and stroke, even in those who are asymptomatic with respect to pulmonary function and oxygen saturation. Any pulmonary AVM with a feeding vessel that exceeds 1.0 mm in diameter requires consideration of occlusion [Trerotola & Pyeritz 2010]. Transcatheter embolotherapy (TCE) with coils, occluder devices (Amplatzer®), or both is the treatment of choice. Occasionally, a small lesion cannot be reached because of its location or the size of the feeding vessel. Multiple coils may be needed to occlude AVMs with large or multiple feeding arteries. Long-term follow up by chest CT and/or contrast echocardiography is indicated after transcatheter occlusion of pulmonary AVMs because of reported recanalization and development or growth of untreated pulmonary AVMs [Cottin et al 2007]. Usually a follow-up CT is done six to 12 months post-occlusion, and if no recanalized or new PAVMs are noted, follow-up CT is done at five-year intervals thereafter [Trerotola & Pyeritz 2010, Faughnan et al 2011].

Hepatic AVMs

 Treatment of cardiac failure or liver failure secondary to hepatic AVMs is currently problematic. Embolization of hepatic AVMs, which is successful for treatment of pulmonary AVMs, has led to lethal hepatic infarctions. Most individuals with symptomatic hepatic AVMs can be satisfactorily managed with intensive medical therapy [Buscarini et al 2011]. Liver transplantation has been the standard treatment for those (usually older) individuals whose symptoms of hepatic failure do not respond to medical management [Buscarini et al 2006, Lerut et al 2006, Dupuis-Girod et al 2010, Lee et al 2010, Chavan et al 2013]. Bevacizumab administered intravenously has been reported to decrease cardiac output and symptoms of heart failure in affected individuals with severe symptoms secondary to hepatic AVMs in case reports and one series [Mitchell et al 2008, Dupuis-Girod et al 2012]. Liver biopsy should be avoided in individuals with HHT [Buscarini et al 2006].

Cerebral AVMs

 Cerebral AVMs greater than 1.0 cm in diameter are usually treated using neurovascular surgery, embolotherapy, and/or stereotactic radiosurgery. Note: Before proceeding with treatment for any visceral AVM, individuals and their doctors are encouraged to contact the nearest multidisciplinary HHT clinic, which can be located through the support group, Cure HHT, to assure that appropriate diagnostic and treatment plans are in place.

Intestinal Polyps

 Any individual diagnosed with juvenile polyposis (JP) should be screened for manifestations of HHT, and the family should be screened for polyps. Any person with HHT who has gastrointestinal polyps, especially at an early age, should be evaluated for JP and managed accordingly (see Juvenile Polyposis Syndrome).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 See Treatment of Manifestations. Prevention is currently focused at ablating, occluding, resecting or shrinking telangiectases and AVMs to prevent associated morbidity and mortality.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 If contrast echocardiography is positive for pulmonary shunting, even if no pulmonary AVM is demonstrated by chest CT, a lifetime recommendation for prophylactic antibiotics in accordance with the American Heart Association protocol for dental cleaning and other "dirty" procedures is advised because of the risk of abscess, particularly brain abscess, associated with right to left shunting [Dupuis-Girod et al 2007]. For the same reason, an air filter or extreme caution not to introduce air bubbles is recommended with IV lines. Note: The risk associated with these lesions is not for subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE).

Surveillance

 The following protocol is recommended for follow up of all individuals for whom the diagnosis of HHT is definite and for all individuals at risk for HHT based on family history in whom HHT has not been ruled out by molecular diagnosis [Faughnan et al 2011]: Annual evaluation by a health care provider familiar with HHT, including interval history for epistaxis or other bleeding, shortness of breath or decreased exercise tolerance, and headache or other neurologic symptoms Periodic hematocrit/hemoglobin and ferritin determination with appropriate treatment for iron deficiency anemia Reevaluation for pulmonary AVM at approximately five-year intervals [Nawaz et al 2008]: Contrast echocardiogram is used (if available) if the previous contrast echocardiogram did not reveal evidence of a pulmonary or intracardiac right to left shunt. Chest CT with contrast rather than pulmonary angiography is used if the previous contrast echocardiogram revealed evidence of a right to left shunt. Reevaluation for cerebral AVM. While cerebral AVMs are nearly always congenital, development or evolution of cerebral AVMs in the first two decades of life has been reported [Hetts et al 2014]. Accordingly, many HHT experts recommend rescreening the brain once more after puberty if the initial brain MRI was done in childhood. Periodic screening for gastrointestinal polyps and malignant change in persons with juvenile polyps 
            Childhood Because serious complications of pulmonary and cerebral AVM can occur at any age [Mei-Zahav et al 2006, Curie et al 2007], screening for pulmonary and cerebral AVMs is recommended in children from families with HHT, especially those with ENG pathogenic variants [Al-Saleh et al 2009]. Head MRI with and without gadolinium is recommended as early as the first few months of life [Faughnan et al 2011]. Pulse oximetry in the supine and sitting positions every one to two years during childhood is recommended as a minimum to screen for pulmonary AVMs. It may be of concern if the sitting value is even a few percentage points below that of the supine value. (Since most pulmonary AVMs are in the lower lobes, many individuals with pulmonary AVMs have higher oxygen saturation when lying than when sitting because of the effect of gravity.) Oxygen saturations below 97% should be followed up with contrast echocardiography. Many, but not all, serious complications of pulmonary AVM during childhood have occurred in hypoxemic children. By at least age ten years, additional evaluation should be performed by contrast echocardiography, with a follow-up CT if positive.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Individuals with significant epistaxis are advised to avoid vigorous nose blowing, lifting of heavy objects, straining during bowel movements, and finger manipulation in the nose. Some individuals with HHT experience increased epistaxis after drinking alcohol. Most otolaryngologists with experience treating individuals with HHT advise against electric and chemical cautery and transcatheter embolotherapy for treatment of recurrent nosebleeds in most situations. Anticoagulants including aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents such as ibuprofen that interfere with normal clotting should be avoided unless required for treatment of other medical conditions. In one study, lower dose agents, particularly anti-platelet agents, were not associated with hemorrhage in a high proportion of affected individuals. The findings support the use of antiplatelet or anticoagulant agents, with caution, if there is a very strong indication for their use [Devlin et al 2013]. Scuba diving should be avoided unless contrast echocardiography performed within the last five years was negative for evidence of a right to left shunt. Liver biopsy should be avoided in individuals with HHT [Buscarini et al 2006].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from preventive measures (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations) and prompt initiation of treatment to reduce morbidity and mortality. If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, evaluate with molecular genetic testing. If the familial pathogenic variant is not known and, consequently, HHT cannot been ruled out by molecular diagnosis, at-risk family members should follow the same protocol as is recommended for individuals in whom the diagnosis of HHT is definite (see Surveillance). Individuals older than age 40 years should have a targeted medical history and clinical examination for features of HHT. The absence of mild but recurrent epistaxis and subtle telangiectases in characteristic locations on careful examination is reassuring. In individuals age 40 years and younger, targeted medical history and clinical examination for features of HHT in addition to an evaluation for brain and pulmonary AVMs should be done initially, as features of HHT may not be identified by medical history and clinical examination in younger individuals. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnant women with HHT and untreated pulmonary AVMs are also at high risk for lung hemorrhage and cerebral complications of air embolism. Women with treated pulmonary AVMs appear to be at no higher risk during pregnancy than those without pulmonary AVMs.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Newer therapies designed to interfere with the development of abnormal vascular connections include thalidomide and bevacizumab; while numerous case reports and small uncontrolled series tout promise, controlled trials are needed [Flieger et al 2006, Mitchell et al 2008, Bose et al 2009, Davidson et al 2010, Lebrin et al 2010, Brinkerhoff et al 2011, Fodstad et al 2011, Suppressa et al 2011, Dupuis-Girod et al 2012]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.