http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hlh

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), as well as to determine the appropriate therapy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Physical examination to evaluate for rashes, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and neurologic dysfunction

Evaluation of blood and bone marrow compartments (CBC and BM biopsy)

Determination of the extent of liver involvement by measuring serum concentration of transaminases, bilirubin, triglycerides, sodium, and lactate dehydrogenase

Identification of potential infectious co-factors, especially viral infection or reactivation, which would require specific treatment

Establishing the presence or extent of CNS involvement by evaluating the CSF and performing neuroimaging and neuropsychological assessment

Testing of NK cell activity, intracellular perforin and granzyme B expression, and CD107a mobilization if these tests are available

Evaluation of inflammatory factors such as serum concentrations of ferritin, sIL2Rα, and other cytokines

Evaluation and monitoring of PT, PTT, and fibrinogen

Clinical genetics consultation

Molecular genetic testing, if not performed previously, which may help to determine if an affected individual is a candidate for bone marrow transplantation:

Genetic testing for PRF1, UNC13D, STX11, and STXBP2 pathogenic variants

Consideration of testing for RAB27A pathogenic variants in any individual with HLH, even with no obvious evidence of depigmentation

Consideration of testing for XIAP (formerly BIRC4) and SH2D1A pathogenic variants in any male with HLH

Collection of materials for future characterization of underlying genetic defects, most significantly in individuals with terminal disease

Treatment of Manifestations



For a detailed explanation of treatment for HLH, see Jordan et al [2011] (full text).

HLH-1994. To improve survival, in 1994 the Histiocyte Society initiated a prospective international collaborative therapeutic study. It combined chemotherapy and immunotherapy (etoposide, corticosteroids, cyclosporine A, and intrathecal methotrexate for individuals with CNS diseases), followed by HSCT in persistent, recurring, and/or familial disease. Although HLH-94 was primarily designed for the treatment of FHL, it was also open to all individuals with non-familial HLH.

HLH-2004. The HLH-2004 protocol was opened on January 1, 2004, and was designed for individuals with FHL and non-familial HLH. This protocol was based on the HLH-94 protocol with minor therapeutic modifications such as initiation of cyclosporine from onset of induction therapy.

The two protocols developed by the Histiocyte Society are available from the Histiocyte Society website.

Given the poor prognosis of individuals with HLH without prompt and effective treatment, it is recommended that treatment be initiated when clinical suspicion is high, even if all recommended studies are incomplete. In general, treatment involves the following:

Chemotherapy and immunotherapy to achieve a clinically stable resolution prior to hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT)

Antibiotics or antiviral agents to treat or prevent infections that may have triggered the exaggerated inflammatory response

Allogeneic HCT, the only curative therapy, which should be undertaken in children with confirmed FHL as early in life as feasible:

Presymptomatically if status is confirmed by family history of clinical HLH, or

After achievement of clinical remission in simplex cases (i.e., a single occurrence in a family)

Use of HCT has improved survival significantly [Henter et al 2002]. Initially, three-year-survival in children who received HLH-94 therapy was approximately 64% [Horne et al 2005a]. More recently, reduced intensity regimens prior to HCT have diminished the early transplant mortality and increased three-year-survival rates to 92% [Marsh et al 2010c]. Long-term follow up reveals that after HCT most children treated early in the disease course return to normal or near-normal quality of life. Brain atrophy secondary to steroid therapy often identified on neuroimaging studies during the acute phase of HLH gradually resolves after HCT [Shuper et al 1998]. However, children who experienced serious CNS involvement may have irreversible neurologic problems and learning disabilities despite adequate disease control following HCT.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Allogeneic HCT is the only curative therapy and should be undertaken in children with confirmed familial HLH as early in life as possible.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Prompt treatment of HLH with infection prophylaxis is indicated in immunocompromised individuals.

Surveillance



The following are recommended annually after HCT:

Neuropsychological evaluation

Regular follow-up by transplant specialists to monitor for late complications relating to growth and hormone function

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



The following should be avoided:

Live vaccinations

Exposure to infections

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Molecular genetic testing of at-risk sibs for the family-specific pathogenic variants is appropriate to identify those who are affected before symptoms occur for the purpose of early medical management and consideration of presymptomatic bone marrow transplantation.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



To date, pregnancy in a woman with primary FHL has not been described. Secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis is a rare complication of pregnancy and is beyond the scope of this review. Primary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis in the fetus is a (reportedly) rare but recognized entity which is typically characterized by nonimmune fetal hydrops [Malloy et al 2004, Nitta et al 2007, Woods et al 2009], preterm delivery [Woods et al 2009], and/or fetal demise. In utero chemotherapy followed by post-natal HCT has been described [Shah et al 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



The treatment of FHL is also the most effective treatment for secondary HLH and the hemophagocytic syndrome associated with other inherited immunodeficiencies.