http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hmdpc

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with dystonia/parkinsonism, hypermanganesemia, polycythemia, and chronic liver disease, the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic examination for dystonia, parkinsonism, and spasticity, including evaluation of ambulation and speech Brain MRI Assessment of the liver including liver function tests, liver ultrasound examination, and liver biopsy if indicated. Consultation with a hepatologist is advised. Establishment of whole blood manganese levels Assessment for physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy Evaluation of swallowing and nutritional status Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Chelation Therapy with Disodium Calcium Edetate

Regular chelation therapy with intravenous disodium calcium edetate can stabilize blood manganese levels, improve neurologic symptoms, and halt liver disease [Tuschl et al 2008, Quadri et al 2012, Tuschl et al 2012]. Short term. The response of an individual to disodium calcium edetate is determined by a single five-day course of twice-daily disodium calcium edetate at 20 mg/kg/dose (made up in 250 mL of 0.9% sodium chloride, given intravenously over 1 hour) and daily measurement of plasma manganese concentration and 24-hour urine manganese levels. Other monitoring includes: serum concentrations of electrolytes, calcium, phosphate, and magnesium; renal and liver function; full blood count; and serum concentrations of trace metals such as zinc, copper, and selenium. Note: To avoid hypocalcemia, disodium calcium edetate infusions need to be administered slowly over at least one hour. If the calcium level (corrected for albumin concentration) is low, infusions should be administered over a longer time span (i.e., >3 hours). Long term. If chelation therapy proves to be effective in the short term, monthly five-day courses of disodium calcium edetate (intravenous 20 mg/kg/dose 2x/day) are expected to lower blood manganese levels and normalize hemoglobin concentration and iron indices [Tuschl et al 2008, Quadri et al 2012, Tuschl et al 2012]. Chelation therapy should be continued lifelong. While on treatment, monitoring once every two months includes: serum concentration of electrolytes, calcium, phosphate, magnesium; renal and liver function; full blood count; and serum concentrations of trace metals such as zinc, copper, and selenium (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Iron Therapy

Iron is a competitive inhibitor of intestinal manganese uptake; hence, supplementation with iron given orally (despite normal serum iron levels) can reduce blood manganese levels and resolve polycythemia [Tuschl et al 2008, Tuschl et al 2012]. The high serum transferrin levels seen in affected individuals are thought to reduce the risk of manganese toxicity. Note: Iron indices need to be monitored frequently (every ~3 months) in those receiving iron supplements (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Liver Transplantation

Liver transplantation should be considered in individuals with end-stage liver disease; however, it has not been attempted in individuals with this disorder and, hence, no data are available.

Other

Dystonia can result in physical deformities and pain. Physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy should be provided. Symptomatic treatment with antispasticity medications and L-dopa has been attempted with limited success.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Chelation therapy and iron supplementation may prevent primary disease manifestations in affected sibs who are asymptomatic (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Early initiation of physiotherapy and orthopedic management aims to prevent contractures and maintain ambulation. As needed, individuals should be referred for adaptive aids (e.g., a walker or wheelchair for gait abnormalities) and assistive communication devices. Symptomatic treatment with antispasticity medications including baclofen and botulinum toxin, and levodopa has been attempted with limited success. Swallowing evaluation and regular dietary assessments are indicated to assure adequate nutrition. Once an adequate oral diet can no longer be maintained, gastrostomy tube placement should be considered. In order to prevent aspiration pneumonia gastric feeding tube and/or tracheostomy may be required. The potential for complications from chelation therapy and/or iron supplementation can be lessened by careful surveillance.

Surveillance

Close monitoring of liver function and disease markers such as hemoglobin, iron indices, and whole-blood manganese is required at three-month intervals. Routine follow up with a neurologist and hepatologist should be provided with repeat assessment of MRI brain, and liver ultrasound and biopsy when clinically indicated (e.g., worsening of liver function) and for monitoring of treatment. Adverse effects of chelation therapy with disodium calcium edetate include hypocalcemia, nephrotoxicity, trace metal and vitamin deficiency, and thrombocytopenia and leukopenia [Lamas et al 2012]. Complete blood count and renal function including urinalysis are assessed at baseline and monthly thereafter. Monitoring may be extended to every other month once on a stable dose. Additionally, the following need to be monitored: trace metal levels including manganese, zinc, copper, and selenium; liver function; electrolytes; calcium, magnesium, and phosphate concentrations; and iron status. Trace metal supplements are provided as needed. Treatment may need to be discontinued if: White blood count <3.5x10^9/L Neutrophils <2.0x10^9/L Platelets <150x10^9/L >2+ proteinuria on >1 occasion (and no evidence of infection) The above cut-off values are based on guidelines for D-penicillamine treatment [Chakravarty et al 2008]. Because chelation treatment with disodium calcium edetate may prevent mortality and morbidity in SLC39A14-related early-onset parkinsonism-dystonia, lower cut-off values may be acceptable. The clinical treatment benefit needs to be carefully weighed against occurring adverse effects for each affected individual. Toxicity of iron supplementation. In order to avoid iron toxicity, serum iron and total iron binding capacity need to be monitored regularly. If serum iron exceeds 80% of total iron binding capacity, iron supplementation should be stopped or reduced.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Foods very high in manganese (cloves; saffron; nuts; mussels; dark chocolate; and pumpkin, sesame and sunflower seeds) should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Chelation therapy and iron supplementation can potentially prevent primary disease manifestations in asymptomatic individuals. Evaluations include: Molecular genetic testing if the SLC30A10 pathogenic variants in the family are known; Periodic monitoring of whole-blood manganese concentration and hemoglobin if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

For an affected fetus, no prenatal treatment is recommended as the disease does not manifest before early childhood. For an affected mother, no data or information on pregnancy management are available.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.