http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hna

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy, the following evaluations are recommended: Comprehensive neuromuscular evaluation Needle EMG to identify the severity and extent of denervation and reinnervation Evaluation of phrenic nerve involvement by chest x-ray, ultrasound/fluoroscopic evaluation of diaphragm movement, and pulmonary function tests in seated and supine positions Clinical genetics consultation For a practical overview of the physical examination and the value of additional investigations in neuralgic amyotrophy see pn.bmj.com.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Currently, no effective therapy is proven to abort or shorten an HNA attack. Treatment of acute episodes of pain and weakness with corticosteroids has been proposed based on retrospective analysis of cases [van Alfen et al 2009, van Eijk et al 2009]. These reports summarize retrospective, anecdotal evidence that corticosteroids can have a favorable effect on pain and recovery. Additional immunomodulatory treatments with such agents as corticosteroids and immune globulin may be considered, but no prospective trials have been performed [van Alfen et al 2009, Johnson et al 2011]. Pain management is the primary goal of therapy: In the acute stage, a combination of a long-acting nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) such as ketorolac and a narcotic such as controlled-release morphine are used. In the second phase of chronic pain resulting from damaged, hypersensitive nerves, co-analgesics such as gabapentin, carbamazepine, and amitryptiline may be used. In the third chronic phase, persistent pain in the neck and shoulder region usually points to strain of the paretic or compensating muscles or to a complication in the glenohumeral joint, such as rotator cuff pathology. As the weakness has to recover by itself, therapy focuses on arm support in a sling, rest, physical therapy, range of motion stretching, and modification of activities. This rehabilitation and prevention of further injury is best managed by a physiatrist. For persistent paresis, physical therapy is recommended to maintain exercise tolerance and prevent joint or ligament contractures. Care must be taken to avoid post-exercise pain in the affected area, as this is often a sign of strain. In this case, exercise should be temporarily deferred, or at least be without extra added weights and with fewer repetitions per set. The patient must find his or her personal level of exercise tolerance; in practice, this is often much lower than estimated (or desired) by the patient or therapist. For severe paresis of the serratus anterior muscle persisting more than one year, corrective surgery can be considered to increase scapular stability, for example by a split pectoralis major muscle transfer. Patients with phrenic nerve palsy need consultation with a respiratory specialist and can benefit from noninvasive nocturnal positive pressure ventilation. For a clinical overview of neurologic and rehabilitative management, see van Alfen [2007]. Cleft palate is best managed by a local craniofacial team.

Surveillance

 As chronic pain resulting from altered biomechanics of the shoulder or upper extremity tends to develop during the first one to two years, follow up every six to 12 months after the initial diagnosis is recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Although immunizations have been known to precede and possibly trigger attacks, it is still recommended that they be given on the usual recommended schedule because the risk of immunization precipitating an attack is probably low [based on expert opinion]. Patients with persistent weakness and especially scapular instability should be cautioned to avoid overexerting the affected limb.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Women with HNA should be monitored in the post-partum interval for the development of symptoms. Prompt treatment with corticosteroids or similar agents may ameliorate an HNA attack.

Therapies Under Investigation

 In an open-label study of oral prednisone in adults with INA or HNA (60 mg/day for one week, followed by a one week taper by 10 mg/day with a last dose of 5 mg) the only statistically significant finding was a reduction in the time for paresis recovery [van Alfen & van Engelen 2006]. Other variables showed no statistical difference from an untreated group of persons with neuralgic amyotrophy; variables included the duration of the initial pain, maximum present Numerical Rating Scale score and use of analgesics, the occurrence of a chronic pain syndrome, maximum Medical Research Council level of strength recovery, complications such as frozen shoulder or shoulder dislocation, and Rankin score. An additional review of the Dutch experience revealed the following: Relative to the untreated patients, a significantly higher proportion of the patients receiving oral prednisolone recovered early from their pareses. Taken in the first month, prednisolone tended to decrease the average duration of the initial pain, although this finding was not statistically significant. Functional recovery set in earlier, with significantly more treated patients achieving full recovery within a year or reporting a ‘‘good’’ outcome within six months. Side effects occurred in 20% of patients, but did not result in discontinuation of treatment [van Eijk et al 2009]. A randomized placebo-controlled trial of oral prednisone conducted in the Netherlands was terminated after three years because of insufficient recruitment within the specified time frame. No treatment effect could be demonstrated in the 13 persons in the primary treatment and placebo arm; however, the small number of participants precluded any definite conclusions. Experimental immunosuppressive therapies that have been used in other inflammatory polyneuropathies, but for which there are limited data available for treatment of attacks in HNA, include the following: Methylprednisolone, intravenous 30 mg/kg (or 1.0 g in adults) every 24 hours for three days [Klein et al 2002, Nakajima et al 2006]. Cessation or tapering of corticosteroid therapy has resulted in relapse. Intravenous immune globulin, 0.4 g/kg/day for five days [Ardolino et al 2003, Moriguchi et al 2011] Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.