http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hnpcc

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Lynch syndrome, the evaluations summarized in Surveillance are recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management of colon cancer in a person with Lynch syndrome. If colon cancer is detected, full colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis is recommended rather than a segmental/partial colonic resection because of the high risk for metachronous cancers [Lynch et al 1988, Aarnio et al 1995, Church & Simmang 2003]. A study of 296 individuals (253 with partial resection, 43 with colectomy anastomosis) from families meeting Amsterdam Criteria found that with a median follow up of 104 months, 22% of affected individuals treated with a partial resection developed a high-risk adenoma and 25% developed a second primary colon cancer, while only 11% and 8% of affected individuals developed adenomas and colon cancers respectively [Kalady et al 2010]. Note: Because the diagnosis of Lynch syndrome is often not considered until after treatment of an initial cancer, many individuals diagnosed with Lynch syndrome have previously had their cancer treated with a limited colonic resection. Although timing may be difficult, evaluating the tumor biopsy specimen by MSI and IHC (and, if indicated, the MHL1 promoter methylation status) may help determine the optimal surgical approach. A study suggests that persons with colon cancer are open to being approached about genetic testing at the time of their diagnosis [Porteous et al 2003]. The other tumors seen in Lynch syndrome are managed as in the general population.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Prophylactic removal of the uterus and ovaries (prior to the development of cancer) can be considered after childbearing is completed. Because routine colonoscopy is an effective preventive measure for colon cancer, prophylactic colectomy (removal of the colon prior to the development of cancer) is generally not recommended for individuals with Lynch syndrome.

Surveillance

 Colon cancer. Regular colonoscopy with removal of precancerous polyps reduces the incidence of colon cancer in individuals with Lynch syndrome. A 2009 study of a Finish cohort with high compliance with screening found no increase in mortality for individuals with Lynch syndrome over their mutation-negative relatives, indicating that annual colonoscopy could help with the prevention and detection of colon cancer [Järvinen et al 2009]. In this study four individuals were diagnosed with colon cancer and lymph node metastases: one was diagnosed during baseline colonoscopy; the other three were diagnosed more than two years after their last colonoscopy. Therefore, the current recommendation is colonoscopy every one to two years beginning between ages 20 and 25 years or two to five years before the earliest diagnosis in the family, whichever is earlier [Järvinen et al 2009, Engel et al 2010, NCCN 2013]. In MSH6 and PMS2 heterozygotes the risk for colon cancer is lower; thus colonoscopy screening may be delayed until age 30 years [Senter et al 2008, Baglietto et al 2010]. Note: Colonoscopy is recommended rather than flexible sigmoidoscopy because of the predominance of proximal colon cancers in Lynch syndrome [Lynch & Smyrk 1996]. Endometrial cancer. Endometrial cancer surveillance is less well established than that for colon cancer. Because many endometrial cancers can be diagnosed at early stages on the basis of symptoms, women should be educated about the signs of endometrial cancers. Currently the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) does not recommend any specific screening for endometrial or ovarian cancer [NCCN 2013]. Studies on the effectiveness of transvaginal ultrasound examination and endometrial biopsy have had conflicting results. Further studies are needed to determine if the combination of transvaginal ultrasound examination and endometrial biopsy detect endometrial cancers at an early age. In a study of the use of transvaginal ultrasound examination to screen for endometrial cancer, no cancers were detected; however, two cancers were detected on the basis of symptoms manifest during the course of the study [Dove-Edwin et al 2002]. A report from a Finnish cohort found that endometrial sampling and transvaginal ultrasound every two to three years resulted in the diagnosis of early stage cancers. However, because endometrial cancer often presents with symptoms at an early stage, it was not clear that the screening improved detection [Järvinen et al 2009]. Ovarian cancer. No specific ovarian cancer screening trials have been conducted in women with Lynch syndrome. Of note, screening for ovarian cancer using CA-125 blood tests and transvaginal ultrasound examination has not been effective in other high-risk populations such as women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 pathogenic variant [Evans et al 2009]. Gastric and duodenal cancers. Upper endoscopy surveillance can be used to screen for cancers of the stomach and duodenum. Currently the NCCN recommends beginning upper endoscopy with a side-viewing scope and extended duodenoscopy between ages 30 and 35 years and repeating them every three to five years depending on the findings. Those with evidence of chronic inflammation, atrophic gastropathy, and/or intestinal metaplasia would be candidates for more frequent evaluation. Note: Biopsies should be evaluated for H pylori infections so that appropriate treatment can be given as needed [NCCN 2013]. Data regarding the effectiveness of upper endoscopy examination for the early detection of gastric cancer in Lynch syndrome are limited. One study suggested no benefit from this screening for gastric cancer because of the lack of identifiable precursor lesions [Renkonen-Sinisalo et al 2002]. A study looking at gastric cancer risk in a Dutch study suggested that the level of risk is sufficient to warrant screening; however, since 87% of the cancers occurred after age 45 years, it may be most cost effective to initiate screening at age 45 years [Capelle et al 2010]. Schulmann et al [2005] found that approximately 50% of the small bowel cancers in a cohort with Lynch syndrome were located in the duodenum, suggesting that upper endoscopy may be useful for screening. However, no trials to determine the efficacy of upper endoscopy for screening for duodenal cancers have been conducted. Distal small bowel. At this time data are limited regarding screening for cancer development in the distal small bowel. Capsule endoscopy and small bowel enterography are available for evaluating the small bowel, but at this time there is no recommendation for routine use of these approaches for small bowel screening, although they may be helpful for evaluating symptomatic individuals. Urinary tract. NCCN recommends consideration of annual urine analysis beginning between age 25 and 30 years [NCCN 2013]. Other cancers. At this time, no specific screening recommendations for other Lynch syndrome associated cancers exist. Affected individuals should be encouraged to follow other general population screening guidelines and to seek prompt medical attention for changes in health or persistent symptoms.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Cigarette smoking increases the risk for colorectal cancer in Lynch syndrome [Watson et al 2004, Pande et al 2010].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Early recognition of cancers associated with Lynch syndrome may allow for timely intervention and improved final outcome; thus, surveillance of asymptomatic at-risk relatives for early manifestations is appropriate. When an MMR pathogenic variant has been identified in a family with Lynch syndrome, molecular genetic testing for the pathogenic variant should be offered to all first-degree relatives (parents, sibs, and children). The sibs should be considered at risk even if the parents have not had cancer because most Lynch syndrome results from an inherited (not de novo) pathogenic variant. If clinical history and family history cannot identify the parent from whom the proband inherited the MMR gene pathogenic variant, molecular genetic testing for the pathogenic variant should be offered to both parents to determine which has the MMR gene pathogenic variant. In general, molecular genetic testing for Lynch syndrome is not recommended for at-risk individuals younger than age 18 years. However, because cancer has been diagnosed in individuals with Lynch syndrome at very young ages [Huang et al 2001], it is recommended that screening begin ten years before the earliest age of onset in the family. In such instances, it is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to children younger than age 18 years prior to initiating cancer screening. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Ideally cancer screening exams would be planned around a pregnancy. An affected woman would be encouraged to be current on her cancer screening before attempting to become pregnant. If an affected woman is diagnosed with cancer during pregnancy, she should be counseled about cancer treatment options and their potential implications for the fetus.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Chromoendoscopy and intensive colonoscopy. A 2008 study compared the effectiveness of chromoendoscopy and intensive colonoscopy inspection in early detection of polyps in persons with Lynch syndrome. Following standard colonoscopy, study participants were randomized to receive a second colonoscopy with chromoendoscopy or a second colonoscopy with careful inspection. This study found that although polyps are frequently missed during standard colonoscopy, no difference was observed between the number of additional polyps detected by chromoendoscopy and by the careful second-look colonoscopy [Stoffel et al 2008]. Further studies are needed to determine if novel colonoscopy techniques confer additional benefit for the screening of persons with Lynch syndrome. 
            Chemoprevention research studies A four-arm trial comparing placebo versus aspirin and placebo versus resistant starch was conducted among 1071 individuals with Lynch syndrome. No effect on the risk for colorectal neoplasia was seen in either the aspirin or resistant starch intervention group [Burn et al 2008]. However, when this cohort was followed for ten years, the group receiving aspirin did show a 63% reduction in colon cancer incidence [Burt 2012]. Resistant starch was not found to have an impact on colon cancer risk [Mathers et al 2012]. Whereas oral contraceptives reduce the risk for endometrial and ovarian cancer in women who are at general population risk, it is unknown if they confer the same benefit in women with Lynch syndrome. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.