http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hnpp

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP), the following evaluations are recommended:

History of focal nerve symptoms

Family history

Neurologic examination

Electromyography / nerve conduction velocity (EMG/NCV)

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Transient bracing, such as with a wrist splint or ankle-foot orthosis (AFO), may be useful. Some individuals with residual foot drop may permanently use an AFO.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Protective pads at elbows or knees may prevent pressure and trauma to local nerves.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Bracing of weak muscles, such as ankle-foot-orthosis for foot drop, may prevent injury.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Risk factors for pressure palsies (and thus activities to avoid) include prolonged sitting with legs crossed, occupations requiring repetitive movements of the wrist, prolonged leaning on elbows, and rapid weight loss [Cruz-Martinez et al 2000, Marriott et al 2002].

Vincristine, commonly used in the chemotherapy of lymphoma, has been reported to exacerbate HNPP [Kalfakis et al 2002].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Relatives at risk may wish to clarify their genetic status by undergoing molecular genetic testing; if found to have the PMP22 pathogenic variant identified in an affected family member, they can choose to avoid the aforementioned agents and circumstances.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Controversy exists as to whether surgical decompression of nerves is of benefit. Because spontaneous recovery is common and because no systematic controlled study of surgical intervention has been done, this decision must be made on an individual basis, taking into consideration knowledge of the natural history of the disease. Although Earle and Zochodne [2013] reported two cases of clinical and electrophysiologic improvement after carpal tunnel decompression surgery, there is a developing consensus that surgical repair of carpal tunnel syndrome is of little benefit to individuals with HNPP and that transposition of the ulnar nerve at the elbow may actually produce poor results [Lazar et al 2007].

No specific treatment for the underlying genetic or biochemical defect exists and no special diet or vitamin regimen is known to alter the natural course of HNPP.