http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hos

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Holt-Oram syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Genetic. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor 
                Limb Limb involvement is determined by physical examination. If limb involvement is not grossly obvious, upper-limb and hand radiographs can be performed to determine if subtle anomalies of the carpal bones are present. 
                Cardiac Chest radiography may demonstrate enlarged pulmonary arteries caused by pulmonary hypertension or cardiomegaly and/or evidence of congestive heart failure. Echocardiography is the procedure of choice to define the presence of septal defects or other structural cardiac anomalies. ECG is recommended for the detection of cardiac conduction disease.

Treatment of Manifestations

 The management of individuals with HOS optimally involves a multidisciplinary team approach with specialists in medical genetics, cardiology, and orthopedics, including a specialist in hand surgery. A cardiologist can assist in determining the need for antiarrhythmic medications and surgery. Individuals with severe heart block may require pacemaker implantation. Pharmacologic treatment for affected individuals with pulmonary hypertension may be appropriate. Individuals with pulmonary hypertension and/or structural heart malformation may require tertiary care center cardiology follow up. Cardiac surgery, if required for congenital heart defect, is standard. The orthopedic team may be able to guide individuals in decisions regarding surgery for improved upper-limb and hand function as well as physical and occupational therapy options. Those individuals born with severe upper-limb malformations may be candidates for surgery to improve function, such as pollicization (creation of a thumb-like digit by moving another digit into the thenar position) in the case of thumb aplasia/hypoplasia [Vaienti et al 2009]. Children with severe limb shortening may benefit from prostheses as well as from physical and occupational therapy. Individuals and families are also likely to benefit from programs providing social support to those with limb anomalies.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 A cardiologist can assist in determining the need for anticoagulants and antibiotic prophylaxis for bacterial endocarditis (SBE).

Surveillance

 ECG is indicated annually or more often in individuals diagnosed with a conduction defect, as well as in individuals at risk for developing a conduction defect. ECG should be combined with annual Holter monitor in individuals with known conduction disease to assess progression. Depending on the nature and significance of potential septal defects, echocardiogram surveillance may be requested every one to five years by the managing cardiologist.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Certain medications may be contraindicated in individuals with arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy, and/or pulmonary hypertension. People with such disorders require individual assessment by a cardiologist.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from appropriate cardiac management. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the TBX5 pathogenic variant in the family is known; Echocardiography, ECG, and hand x-rays (anterior/posterior view) if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnant women with HOS who have a known history of a structural cardiac defect or cardiac conduction abnormality should be followed by a multidisciplinary team (including a cardiologist) during pregnancy. Affected women who have not undergone cardiac evaluation should do so prior to pregnancy if possible, or as soon as the pregnancy is recognized.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.