http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hpe-overview

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in a child diagnosed with holoprosencephaly (HPE), evaluation for the following is recommended at a minimum (other organ systems may also be investigated depending on specific clinical findings): 
Cleft lip and/or palate Hydrocephalus and/or features of HPE or other cortical anomalies. All children with midline facial anomalies should undergo brain MRI; attention should also be paid to the pituitary region, which often requires high-resolution thin sections. Growth deficiency. Height, weight, and head circumference should be measured. It is important to compare weight to height in addition to plotting absolute measurements. Evaluation should include thyroid function tests, bone age, complete blood count, blood chemistries, sedimentation rate, insulin-like growth factor 1, and insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3. If growth hormone deficiency is found, panhypopituitarism should be assessed by specific hormone testing and brain MRI. Pituitary dysfunction. Sagittal MRI can be used to determine pituitary absence or ectopia and anatomic information. CNS anomalies and absent corpus callosum and/or septum pellucidum may accompany endocrine dysfunction. Serum analysis for specific hormones can be performed to evaluate pituitary function. Oral feeding and swallowing. Evaluation should include assessment of caloric intake, swallowing abilities, oral motor skills, and presence of gastroesophageal reflux. Occupational and speech evaluations are warranted to evaluate and address feeding concerns. Studies for diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux including esophageal pH probe, milk scan, barium swallow, and/or endoscopy may be considered.

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment for HPE varies according to the brain malformations and associated anomalies [Levey et al 2010]. Most affected children benefit from a multidisciplinary team approach with clinicians very familiar with HPE. Hormone replacement therapy has been successful in some children with pituitary dysfunction. Antiepileptic drugs can help decrease the frequency and intensity of seizures. Feeding difficulties and failure to thrive may be managed with gastrostomy tube placement and Nissen fundoplication if gastroesophageal reflux and vomiting are issues. Thickening of feeds and upright positioning after feeding may be helpful to alleviate gastroesophageal reflux. To achieve the best growth in the child with HPE, the quality of the feeds is more important than the quantity. Accommodations for oral feeding with cleft lip and/or palate may require specific nipples, cups, and parental training. Early surgical repair may improve feeding. Placement of a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt may be necessary in children with HPE and hydrocephalus. In older children, surgical repair of cleft lip and/or palate may be indicated. For children with cleft lip and/or palate, referral to a specialized cleft or craniofacial clinic is recommended. Onset of new neurologic findings or deterioration warrant evaluation for seizures and/or hydrocephalus and/or shunt malfunction. Such evaluation would include vital sign monitoring, neurologic examination, EEG, and MRI. A major aspect of treatment is support and counseling of the parents [Mercier et al 2010].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Children with hormonal disturbances should receive prompt evaluation during times of stress (e.g., illness, surgery). Consultation with subspecialists regarding fluid and electrolyte management should be sought if elective surgery is planned. Children with diabetes insipidus need careful monitoring of fluid and electrolyte intake.

Surveillance

Height, weight, and head circumference should be measured during health maintenance evaluations. Evaluation for endocrine deficiencies should be undertaken at appropriate intervals and during health maintenance visits.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

A careful family history by a clinical geneticist familiar with HPE is critical, as genetic changes associated with HPE, even in a mildly affected individual, would be considered a risk factor for manifestations such as developmental delay. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Assessment of the risks and benefits of surgery and of the individual's brain abnormality is essential in determining the extent and benefit of surgical intervention. Consistent with the ethical principle of beneficence, intervention at the earliest time possible is advised.