

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HOKPP), the following evaluations are recommended: During an acute paralytic attack: Assessment of respiratory status to detect those individuals who may have early respiratory failure Measurement of serum potassium concentration Cardiac electrophysiologic testing (electrocardiagram) to assess for life-threatening cardiac consequences of hypokalemia Assessment for swallowing difficulty Between attacks or in a currently asymptomatic individual: Neurologic examination to assess muscle strength in the legs Measurement of the following thyroid functions (see Note): Plasma thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) Free thyroxine (FT4) Free triiodothyronine (FT3) In those with fixed muscle weakness, consideration of CT scan of muscles to evaluate the extent of myopathy Clinical genetics consultation Note: (1) Hyperthyroidism may be a trigger for a hypokalemic episode in individuals with HOKPP; (2) thyroid function tests may help to distinguish between HOKPP and TPP in those who have a pathogenic variant in KCNJ18.

Treatment of Manifestations

 For a comprehensive summary of the management of hypokalemic periodic paralysis, see Levitt [2008] (full text). The principles of treatment are summarized in Table 7. Principles of Treatment for Individuals with HOKPP Strenuous effort Prolonged immobility Carbohydrate-rich diet Monitor episodes of weakness noting time of day & specific triggers Provide dietary review/counseling Shorten/prevent aggravation of the weakness episode Normalize kalemia Provide K+ supplementation (oral, or IV if oral impossible or if potassium very low) Avoid glucose intake Do not use slow-release forms of potassium Oral potassium: initially, 1 mEq/kg; add 0.3 mEq/kg after 30 minutes if no improvement IV potassium: 0.3 mEq/kg/h Avoid corticosteroids if possible Use alpha- or beta adrenergic drugs w/caution, even in local anesthesia or ophthalmology Kinesitherapy in case of permanent pelvic deficit Adaptive measures: (1) at school & especially for sports; (2) in the work setting Paralytic crisis. Treatment of the paralytic crisis is far from perfect, as the only tool is the administration of potassium by mouth or IV, which addresses the hypokalemia directly, but the weakness only indirectly. Resolution of muscle weakness and normalization of the serum concentration of potassium are not strictly parallel. The serum concentration of potassium may normalize before weakness begins to resolve. During a paralytic attack, there is usually no true potassium depletion in the body (unless digestive or renal losses from another cause are associated), but there is a reversible transfer of potassium from the extracellular to the intracellular space. The global potassium pool (and especially the intracellular pool of the body) is conserved, and the goal of the treatment is to raise the blood potassium level just enough to trigger the shift to repolarization of skeletal muscle membrane, and the liberation of intracellularly sequestered potassium. 
            Mild to moderate paralytic episodes Treatment may occur in a familial or non-medical setting if the diagnosis is well-established and the affected individual is able to manage paralytic episodes. Rapid recovery is typically possible with oral intake of chloride potassium salts, either as capsules or liquid-containing vials. Aqueous potassium contained in vials may act more rapidly. An initial intake of 1mEq/kg potassium chloride is often used (60 mEq; i.e., 4.5 g of potassium chloride for a 60-kg person). A response (at least partial) should be seen after 30 minutes. If no improvement occurs after 30 minutes, an additional 0.3 mEq/kg can be administered (20 mEq; i.e., 1.5 g of potassium chloride for a 60 kg person). Note: (1) Slow-release forms of potassium should be avoided during a paralytic attack. (2) Potassium ingesting should be followed by oral intake of water (e.g., 100 mL (4 oz) of water for each 20 mEq of potassium). (3) Liquids containing high sugar or sodium content should be avoided. Severe paralytic episodes. If an affected individual has followed the instructions above for a mild to moderate attack and either no improvement or further aggravation is observed after an additional 30 minutes, medical supervision with measurement of serum potassium level should be considered. The total dose of potassium taken over a 24-hr period for the treatment of an acute attack should not exceed 200 mEq. During severe paralytic episodes or attacks associated with respiratory, swallowing, or speaking difficulties, or with signs of arrythmia, the affected individual must be transferred to hospital. In the case of very low serum potassium and severe symptoms (airway compromise with ictal dysphagia, accessory respiratory muscle paralysis, arrhythmia associated with hypokalemia), intravenous potassium treatment should be initiated. Note the following critical points: The concentration of intravenous potassium chloride solution should not exceed 40 mEq/L because of the risk for thrombophlebitis (the use of a central catheter is rarely necessary). The solution should be given as a continuous infusion that does not exceed 0.3 mEq/kg/h of potassium (i.e., 18 mEq/h for a 60-kg person) because of the high risk for arrhythmia or cardiac arrest associated with faster infusions. The physician should be aware that hyperkalemia may occur, as there is no true potassium depletion; a reverse shift of potassium from the intracellular to the extracellular space occurs during the resolution of paralytic episode. A Y-branched peripheral venous line containing potassium chloride should be branched to a perfusion of mannitol or normal saline (avoid glucose-containing solutions, which may enhance hypokalemia). To prevent cardiac arrhythmias, it is important to monitor the electrocardiogram (ECG) before, during, and after treatment and to perform repeat assessments of blood potassium concentration: A prominent increase in the amplitude of the U wave, triggered by hypokalemia, is associated with a higher susceptibility to the ventricular arrhythmia known as torsades de pointes. Some individuals exhibit serious arrhythmias with only mild hypokalemia. Large and sharp T waves are a marker of hyperkalemia and may occur during and after recovery; they are associated with a risk for cardiac arrest. Monitoring of ECG and blood potassium concentration must be continued some hours after normalization of the serum potassium concentration, in order to detect a relapse of hypokalemia or the development of hyperkalemia secondary to excessive potassium load. Administration of supplemental potassium must be discontinued when the serum potassium concentration is normalized, even if weakness persists. Attempting to abort paralytic attacks when they begin. Affected individuals are advised to keep a sufficient dose of potassium in various places (at the bedside, in pockets or handbags, in the car) so that when warning symptoms appear, the person can take potassium and possibly avoid a full-blown attack, which would usually occur within minutes [Levitt 2008]. It is also acknowledged that maintaining mild physical activity may abort attacks in some cases. Myopathy. No curative treatment is known for fixed myopathy in HOKPP. The effects of muscle weakness are managed as in other disorders with similar manifestations. Physiotherapy may help to maintain strength and motor abilities, especially after 40 years of age, when permanent muscle weakness is more often seen. The physiotherapist must be aware of the following peculiarity of periodic paralysis: that sustained effort results in exacerbation of weakness. Therefore, self-managed exercise should be preferred to superimposed physiotherapy [Cavel-Greant et al 2012].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Preventive treatment is intended to decrease the frequency and intensity of paralytic attacks. Triggering factors need to be identified and, if possible, avoided (see Table 7). A diet rather low in sodium and carbohydrate and rich in potassium is recommended. Potassium supplementation for prevention and treatment of attacks is an empiric but effective treatment for shortening attacks and sometimes preventing their occurrence (see Treatment of Manifestations). Oral intake of potassium salts (10-20 mmol/dose, 3 doses/day) can prevent attacks, especially if the dose of potassium is taken some hours before the usual time of the attack (i.e., a nocturnal dose if crises occur at awakening). Acetazolamide is generally considered the additive treatment of choice for prevention of paralytic attacks and myopathy in HOKPP. However, there is no standardized treatment regimen and no consensus as to when to start treatment with acetazolamide. Typical dosage for acetazolamide in adults is between 125 mg/day and 1000 mg/day (usually 250-500 mg/day), divided into three doses and taken with meals; in children a dose of 5-10 mg/kg/day, divided into three doses and taken with meals, is used. Acetazolamide treatment: Is beneficial in approximately 50% of individuals with HOKPP; Has no effect in 30% of affected individuals; Exacerbates symptoms in approximately 20% (this deleterious effect may be predicted by genotype, see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations). In some affected persons, permanent weakness may be partly reversed and muscle strength may be improved by acetazolamide treatment [Links et al 1988]. Whether acetazolamide treatment prevents or treats myopathy and the resulting fixed weakness that occurs with age is unknown. Further studies are needed to evaluate the effect of preventive acetazolamide treatment on attack rate, severity-weighted attack rate, permanent weakness, and myopathy. Alternatives to acetazolamide. If acetazolamide is not tolerated or if it is not effective after prolonged use, alternatives include dichlorphenamide (50-200 mg/day), triamterene (50-150 mg/day), and spironolactone (25-100 mg/day). Other drugs have been used with limited success: lithium gluconate [Confavreux et al 1991] (though Ottosson & Persson [1971] earlier demonstrated lack of efficacy); pinacidil [Ligtenberg et al 1996]; and bumetanide [Wu et al 2013].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Creating a safe environment, getting help in case of paralytic attack, and preventing falls and accidents are critical [Levitt 2008]. An affected person experiencing a paralytic attack must have access to potassium as well as physical assistance. Thus, those with HOKPP should inform their companions or acquaintances of their risk for paralytic attack, especially in a sports or school context, so that they can access appropriate help rapidly in case of an attack. Falls and injuries from falls are frequent in those with HOKPP (67% of affected individuals age >40 years report such falls and injuries) [Cavel-Greant et al 2012]. Pre- or postoperative paralysis. Because of the risk for paralysis preceding or following anesthesia, precautions should be taken during administration of anesthesia to individuals with HOKPP. Individuals with HOKPP should be considered susceptible to malignant hyperthermia and managed with a non-triggering anesthetic technique – although general anesthesia using volatile anesthetics and succinylcholine has been reported as safe in a small number of individuals with HOKPP. General guidelines for perioperative care include the following: Strict control of serum potassium concentration Avoidance of large glucose and salt loads Low-carbohydrate diet Maintenance of body temperature and acid-base balance Careful use of neuromuscular blocking agents with continuous monitoring of neuromuscular function [Hofer et al 2001] Late-onset myopathy with fixed muscle weakness. It is not known whether the prevention of paralytic attacks also prevents the development of myopathy. Individuals with known pathogenic variants who developed myopathy without having experienced episodes of weakness have been reported.

Surveillance

 The frequency of consultations needs to be adapted to the individual's signs and symptoms and response to preventive treatment. Neurologic examination with attention to muscle strength in the legs should be performed, in order to detect permanent weakness associated with myopathy. Questionnaires completed by the affected individual may be used to evaluate disease severity without treatment and with treatment. For those individuals who take acetazolamide the following parameters should be evaluated every three months: complete blood count, electrolytes, glucose, uric acid, and liver enzyme levels. Renal ultrasound should be performed annually.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Factors such as the following can trigger paralytic attacks and thus should be avoided when possible: Unusually strenuous effort Excess of carbohydrate-rich meals Sweets Alcohol Prolonged immobility Oral or intravenous corticosteroids, which may induce paralytic attacks and thus should be used with care in individuals with HOKPP Glucose infusionm, which may induce paralytic attacks and thus should be replaced by another type of infusion

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 When a pathogenic variant is identified in a proband, molecular genetic testing of at-risk, asymptomatic family members is appropriate because of the risk for unexpected acute paralysis and/or malignant hyperthermia. When the results of presymptomatic testing are not known, the at-risk family members must be considered at risk for complications and precautions must be taken, particularly in the administration of anesthesia and avoidance of risk factors. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 While in utero acetazolamide exposure is reported to cause limb defects in rodents, acetazolamide therapy during human pregnancy does not appear to increase the risk for fetal malformations [Heinonen et al 1977].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has been used in research protocols to evaluate abnormalities in ionic muscle content in periodic paralyses of different types. It represents a possible research tool to evaluate the effect of treatment on skeletal muscles and to assess clinical outcomes in individuals with HOKPP.