

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS), the following are recommended: Complete ophthalmologic evaluation Skin examination for severity of hypopigmentation and, after infancy, for evidence of skin damage and skin cancer History of bleeding problems and symptoms suggesting pulmonary fibrosis and/or colitis. For evaluation for lung fibrosis, pulmonary function tests (PFTs) should be performed in individuals older than age 20 years. Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 
            Eyes
           The majority of individuals with albinism have significant hyperopia (far-sightedness) or myopia (near-sightedness), and astigmatism. Correction of these refractive errors can improve visual acuity. Strabismus surgery is usually not required but can be performed for cosmetic purposes, particularly if the strabismus is marked or fixed. The surgery is not always successful. Aids such as hand-held magnifying devices or bioptic lenses are helpful adjuncts in the care of visually impaired individuals with HPS. Preferential seating in school is beneficial, and a vision consultant may be useful. Skin. Treatment of skin cancer does not differ from that in the general population. 
            Bleeding
           Humidifiers may reduce the frequency of nosebleeds. Oral contraceptives can limit the duration of menstrual periods. Menorrhagia has been treated with a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system [Kingman et al 2004] and with recombinant factor VIIa [Lohse et al 2011]. Treatment of minor cuts includes placing thrombin-soaked Gelfoam® over an open wound that fails to clot spontaneously. For more invasive trauma, such as wisdom tooth extraction, DDAVP (1-desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin, 0.2 µg/kg in 50 mL of normal saline) can be given as a 30-minute intravenous infusion just prior to the procedure. The use of DDAVP may or may not improve the bleeding time [Cordova et al 2005]. For extensive surgeries or protracted bleeding, platelet or red blood cell transfusions may be required. 
            Pulmonary fibrosis
           When the pulmonary disease becomes severe, oxygen therapy can be palliative. One individual with HPS-1 remains well after undergoing lung transplantation [Lederer et al 2005]. The authors know of several additional successful lung transplantations. Colitis. The granulomatous colitis of HPS resembles Crohn's colitis and, as such, may respond to steroids and other anti-inflammatory agents [Mora & Wolfsohn 2011]. Remicade® has also been used with benefit [Erzin et al 2006, Felipez et al 2010]. Immunodeficiency. When present, immunodeficiency is typically responsive to granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Skin. Skin care in HPS is dictated by the amount of pigment in the skin and the cutaneous response to sunlight. Protection from the sun should be provided to prevent burning, other skin damage, and skin cancer. In very sensitive individuals, sun exposure as short as five to ten minutes can be significant, while exposure of 30 minutes or more is usually significant in less sensitive individuals. Prolonged periods in the sun require skin protection with clothing (hats with brims, long sleeves and pants, and socks). For extremely sun-sensitive individuals, sun screens with a high SPF value (total blocks with SPF 45-50+) are appropriate; for less sun-sensitive individuals, sun screens with SPF values of 15 or above can be used. Bleeding. Individuals with HPS should consider obtaining a medical alert bracelet that explicitly describes the functional platelet defect, as the standard tests for bleeding dysfunction (platelet count, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time) are normal in HPS. Pulmonary fibrosis. Prior to the development of pulmonary fibrosis, attention should be paid to maximizing pulmonary function. This entails avoidance of cigarette smoke, prompt treatment of pulmonary infections, immunization with influenza and pneumococcal vaccines, and regular moderate exercise.

Surveillance

 Eyes. Annual ophthalmologic examination, including assessment of refractive error, is indicated. Skin. Over many years, exposure to the sun of lightly pigmented skin can result in coarse, rough, thickened skin (pachydermia), solar keratoses (premalignant lesions), and skin cancer. Both basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma can develop. Although skin melanocytes are present in individuals with HPS, melanoma is rare. Examination for these findings should be performed at least annually. Pulmonary fibrosis. Pulmonary function testing should be performed annually in adults. Colitis. Colitis is suspected in those with a history of cramping, increased mucus in the stool, and rectal bleeding; colonoscopy is used to confirm the diagnosis.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Bleeding. All aspirin-containing products as well as activities that could involve the risk of a bleeding episode should be avoided. Pulmonary fibrosis. Cigarette smoking decreases pulmonary function and may worsen progression of pulmonary fibrosis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 In individuals with HPS-1 and HPS-4, the diagnosis of HPS will be apparent because the hypopigmentation and nystagmus are clinically evident. In rare families with the milder types (HPS-3, HPS-5, or HPS-6), the evaluation of apparently unaffected sibs may yield a positive diagnosis: If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, platelet aggregation or platelet whole mount electron microscopy studies can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnancies should proceed normally for an affected mother or an affected fetus. Delivery, however, carries risk for bleeding in a woman with HPS; surveillance and a hematology consultation for anticipation of bleeding complications during delivery should be initiated once pregnancy is confirmed.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Initial studies suggest a salutary effect on pulmonary function of the investigational drug pirfenidone in affected individuals with pulmonary function greater than 50% of normal [Gahl et al 2002]. A follow-up clinical trial was unable to confirm this finding, but also did not refute it [O’Brien et al 2011]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 In general, opaque contact lenses or darkly tinted lenses do not improve visual function. Dark glasses may be helpful for individuals with albinism, but many prefer to go without dark glasses because they reduce vision. No successful therapy for or prophylaxis against the pulmonary fibrosis of HPS exists. Steroids are often tried but have no apparent beneficial effect.