http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hrpt2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a CDC73-related disorder, the following are recommended:

Evaluation for primary hyperparathyroidism: measurement of concomitant intact parathyroid hormone levels and serum calcium concentration

Baseline bone density of the lumbar spine, hips, and distal radius by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) and 24-hour urine collection for calcium in individuals with evidence of primary hyperparathyroidism

Evaluation for jaw tumors: panoramic jaw x-ray with neck shielding

Evaluation for renal lesions: renal ultrasound examination preferred; CT and/or MRI as clinically indicated

Evaluation for uterine tumors in women starting at reproductive age: pelvic examination as part of routine gynecologic care; pelvic ultrasound examination (preferred) and other imaging studies (CT and/or MRI) as clinically indicated

Consultation with a medical genetics professional (e.g., medical geneticist, genetic counselor): recommended

Treatment of Manifestations



Primary hyperparathyroidism. While the preferred treatment for sporadic primary hyperparathyroidism is parathyroidectomy by a high-volume parathyroid surgeon (most of whom prefer a minimally invasive or targeted approach), the optimal surgical approach to primary hyperparathyroidism in HPT-JT syndrome has not yet been established. However, because many individuals with HPT-JT syndrome present with a single parathyroid tumor, a minimally invasive approach to remove the parathyroid tumor followed by close monitoring for recurrent primary hyperparathyroidism has been suggested. Minimally invasive parathyroidectomy requires the use of:

Preoperative imaging (e.g., ultrasound examination, 99mTc-sestamibi scanning [often with concomitant SPECT/CT], CT, and/or MRI to localize the abnormal parathyroid gland); AND

Intraoperative measurement of iPTH (IOPTH) to ensure an adequate resection of all hyperfunctioning tissue.

IOPTH involves measurement of serum iPTH at the initiation of the surgery and again at five minutes and ten minutes following excision of the presumed parathyroid tumor. An IOPTH that drops more than 50% in the first five minutes is highly suggestive of cure. The success rate of such a measurement is over 95%. If the IOPTH does not drop more than 50% in five minutes, residual hyperfunctioning tissue likely remains in situ and further exploration is recommended to look for other abnormally hyperfunctioning glands. Standard cervical exploration to visualize all four parathyroid glands is generally not recommended unless it appears that residual hyperfunctioning tissue remains.

If there is any suggestion of adherence of the parathyroid gland to the thyroid parenchyma, a concomitant thyroid lobectomy should be considered. In the past, prophylactic total parathyroidectomy was suggested to reduce the risk of parathyroid carcinoma in HPT-JT syndrome; however, given the difficulty in treating post-surgical hypoparathyroidism, this approach is not widely accepted. Because the disease usually involves a single gland, a multigland resection increases the risk for hypoparathyroidism with no true benefit of reducing disease recurrence. Therefore, subtotal parathyroidectomy (the standard surgery in MEN1) is not recommended.

Regardless of the surgical approach, the risk of recurrent and/or new metachronous disease exists; therefore, regular lifelong serum testing for biochemical evidence of hyperparathyroidism is recommended (see Surveillance).

Parathyroid carcinoma is suspected in those with extremely elevated serum calcium and iPTH levels, more profound symptoms, and clear radiographic evidence of parathyroid neoplasia. In this situation, an en bloc resection including the ipsilateral thyroid lobe should occur. Care to prevent fracture of the tumor, which could seed the local area, is critical. Experienced surgeons can usually distinguish typical benign parathyroid tissue from carcinoma. Benign tissue is peanut butter in color, soft, small, and non-adherent to surrounding structures. Benign tumors are usually oval, round, or kidney-shaped in appearance. In contrast, parathyroid carcinoma is usually hard, firm, white-grey, large, and intimately attached to surrounding structures [Author, personal experience].

Cinacalcet hydrochloride (Sensipar®), a calcimimetic that binds to the calcium-sensing receptor, has been approved for the treatment of severe hypercalcemia due to primary hyperparathyroidism in individuals who are unable to undergo parathyroidectomy and for the treatment of parathyroid carcinoma-related hypercalcemia [Messa et al 2011]. Its use in CDC73-related disorders has not been reported, but cinacalcet has proven effective in cases of inoperable parathyroid carcinoma [Silverberg et al 2007].

Jaw tumors. Jaw tumors should be treated surgically as indicated based on the size, location, and symptoms of the lesion. Treatment of choice is complete resection, which may not be possible in all cases. There are no well-defined medical approaches to unresectable jaw tumors. Patients should be followed closely because of the possibility of recurrence.

Renal manifestations. No treatment guidelines for renal manifestations associated with HPT-JT syndrome have been proposed to date. Management guidelines are available for other polycystic kidney diseases, such as autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease; however, the natural history and likelihood of ESRD is likely to be different in HPT-JT syndrome-associated renal disease. Individuals with evidence of cystic kidney disease should be managed by nephrologists on a case-by-case basis.

Uterine tumors. No treatment guidelines for uterine manifestations associated with HPT-JT syndrome have been proposed to date. Individuals with evidence of a uterine tumor should be managed by a gynecologist on a case-by-case basis.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Prophylactic total parathyroidectomy has been suggested to reduce the risk of parathyroid carcinoma. However, given the rarity of parathyroid carcinoma in individuals with HPT-JT syndrome and the difficulty in treating post-surgical hypoparathyroidism, this approach is not recommended.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



The risk of post-operative hypoparathyroidism can be minimized by: ensuring normal preoperative 25-(OH) vitamin D concentrations; recognizing risk factors for hungry bone syndrome preoperatively (e.g., elevated serum alkaline phosphatase concentration); and implementing close postoperative monitoring that includes prompt replacement of calcium and vitamin D as indicated. Minimization of postoperative nausea and vomiting can help prevent an increase in venous pressure, which could lead to oozing and devascularization of the remaining in situ parathyroid glands.

Biopsy of extrathyroidal tissue in the neck should be avoided when possible to reduce the risk of seeding of a possible parathyroid carcinoma.

An en bloc resection should be considered in all patients suspected of having parathyroid carcinoma in order to optimize a surgical cure and prevent positive surgical margins or seeding of parathyroid tissue during removal.

Surveillance



There are currently no well-established surveillance guidelines for individuals with a CDC73 pathogenic variant. Based on an extensive literature review, the authors make the following management recommendations:

Measure serum concentrations of calcium, iPTH, and 25-(OH) vitamin D (to evaluate for possible coexisting vitamin D deficiency as a cause of elevated iPTH levels or unexpectedly “normal” calcium concentrations) every 12 months starting at age five to ten years.

In patients with a history of parathyroid carcinoma who develop a rise in calcium levels, consider the possibility of a new primary parathyroid tumor in addition to recurrence/progression of malignant disease.

Consider periodic parathyroid ultrasound examination for the detection of non-functioning parathyroid carcinoma, which has developed on rare occasion in individuals with a CDC73 pathogenic variant [Guarnieri et al 2006].

Obtain panoramic x-ray dental imaging with neck shielding at least every five years, in addition to regular dental hygiene maintenance, starting at age ten years. Dental providers should be notified of the presence of a CDC73-related disorder and the need for monitoring for osseous fibromas of the maxilla and mandible.

Monitor for kidney lesions by renal ultrasound examination at least every five years starting at the age of diagnosis. Serum creatinine concentrations should be monitored in those individuals with renal cysts. Individuals with solid lesions should be referred for appropriate subspecialty care.

Starting at reproductive age, women with a CDC73-related disorder should undergo regular gynecologic care (including pelvic examination). Care providers in obstetrics and gynecology should be notified of the risk of uterine tumors. Pelvic ultrasound examination should be obtained in any woman with a menstrual disorder (particularly abnormal uterine bleeding or menorrhagia) with further imaging studies (CT or MRI) as clinically indicated.

The age at which genetic testing and surveillance should begin for at-risk relatives is also not well established.

The authors recommend considering testing and surveillance for primary hyperparathyroidism and jaw tumors beginning at around age five to ten years, as this is the age of the youngest reported case of hyperparathyroidism and is ten years younger than the earliest reported age of parathyroid carcinoma diagnosis.

The age at onset of kidney lesions is not well described; renal ultrasound examination can be considered at time of diagnosis.

Uterine tumors have only been reported in adults; surveillance can begin at reproductive age.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



The following should be avoided:

Dehydration

Radiation exposure

Biopsy of extrathyroidal tissue in the neck, which increases the risk of seeding of a possible parathyroid carcinoma

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



If the family-specific CDC73 germline pathogenic variant has been identified, molecular genetic testing should be offered to at-risk relatives starting around age five to ten years in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and/or preventive measures.

When molecular testing for a CDC73 pathogenic variant is not possible or not informative, individuals at 50% risk (first-degree relatives of an individual with CDC73-related disorders) should undergo routine evaluation for primary hyperparathyroidism (see Surveillance).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Primary hyperparathyroidism during pregnancy may pose increased risks to the mother (symptomatic hypercalcemia) and to the fetus (intrauterine growth retardation, preterm delivery, intrauterine fetal demise, and/or postpartum neonatal hypocalcemia). Conservative observation may be appropriate for mild asymptomatic hypercalcemia, but for symptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism or evidence of adverse effects on the fetus, surgery (preferred in the second trimester) is required for definitive treatment. These women should be managed in conjunction with a maternal-fetal medicine specialist.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.