

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA) (also known as hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IV [HSAN IV]), the following evaluations are recommended: General physical examination for evidence of self-mutilation of tongue, lips, buccal mucosa; skin injury including infection and/or palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, bone injury including old poorly healing fractures and/or joint injury including dislocations, as well as behavioral and developmental problems Orthopedic consultation regarding assessment of injuries of the extremities and weight-bearing joints, including radiographs as necessary Dental examination to assess for auto-extraction of teeth, evidence of dental caries and/or abscess, as well as overall dental health Ophthalmologic examination to assess for evidence of neuropathic keratitis and its sequelae (corneal infection, ulceration, and/or perforation) Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment is supportive and is best provided by specialists in pediatrics, orthopedics, dentistry, ophthalmology, and dermatology. It is important to provide assistance and encourage therapies for behavioral, developmental, and motor delays that are appreciated during infancy and early childhood as well as to provide educational and social support for school-age children and adolescents. Hyperthermia or hypothermia. Monitoring of the body temperature helps to institute timely measures to prevent hyperthermia or hypothermia. Hyperthermia responds to direct cooling in a bath or cooling blanket; hypothermia responds to warming by a blanket as necessary. Control of environmental temperatures is essential to prevent hyperthermia or hypothermia. Orthopedic. Bone fractures of weight-bearing bones and joints can lead to failure of bone union and hypertrophic osseous callous formation, as well as neurogenic arthropathy (Charcot joint) [Szöke et al 1996, Schulman et al 2001, Bar-On et al 2002, Kim et al 2013, Feldman et al 2009]. Because such injuries and their sequelae are difficult to treat, the goal of orthopedic management is to prevent severe articular destruction and the need for surgical amputation. Although the parents and caregivers of an affected child are advised to modify the child’s activities to prevent injuries, it is often very difficult due to the child’s inability to perceive pain. While protective appliances, such as braces to prevent injury to the lower limbs can be tried, they are associated with a high risk of secondary skin injury and, thus, infection. Careful daily evaluation by parents and caregivers for early signs of otherwise unrecognized injury is important for early detection and treatment of injuries. Appropriate footwear and periods of non-weight-bearing are important in the prevention and early treatment of ulcerating foot lesions [Bar-On et al 2002]. In the treatment of various injuries the absence of pain perception makes immobilization difficult, often resulting in delayed healing. Additionally, infection is a serious potential complication of any invasive procedure, such as treatment of bone fractures with an external fixator [Kim et al 2013]. Of note, longstanding infections require wide surgical debridement. Bone and joint deformities can be managed by corrective osteotomy; leg length discrepancy can be managed by shoe lifts and/ or epiphysiodesis [Bar-On et al 2002]; however, the value of surgical intervention needs to be weighed against non-surgical approaches including close monitoring [Kim et al 2013]. Joint dislocations are best treated conservatively. Dental. Early and routine preventative oral/dental care and timely treatment of the dental and oral conditions associated with CIPA can help reduce the characteristic oral and dental manifestations [Amano et al 1998, Ikeda & Nihei 1999, Bodner et al 2002, Ikeda et al 2004]. In infants, the incisal edges of newly erupted mandibular primary incisors traumatize the ventral surface of the tongue with sucking and nursing. This ulceration of the tongue can lead to bleeding and infection of the tongue, and halitosis, as well as systemic problems such as poor weight gain and failure to thrive. The oral self-mutilation (i.e., the severe biting injuries [and resultant scarring] of the fingertips and/or oral soft tissues [tongue, lip, and buccal mucosa]) is found in most affected individuals. Although self-mutilation appears to decrease with age and with intellectual, social, and/or emotional development, such behaviors cannot be completely eliminated. Methods used to prevent injuries to the lips, buccal mucosa, tongue, and teeth include tooth extraction, and/or filing (smoothing) of their sharp incisal edges [Bodner et al 2002], and/or use of a mouth guard, a protective plate of thermoplastic resin ~0.6-0.8 mm thick [Ikeda & Nihei 1999, Ikeda et al 2004]. Mouth guards must be refashioned as new teeth erupt and the jaw grows. Although use of a mouth guard is a reasonable approach, mouth guards can be difficult to prepare and/or retain. The high rate of missing teeth and untreated carious teeth observed in individuals with CIPA suggests that dental examination and/or care is underutilized or that tooth decay may be overlooked because of the insensitivity to pain. Serious tooth decay can cause osteomyelitis that can lead to mandibular bone fracture. Eye. Care for dry eyes, prevention of corneal infection, and daily observation of the ocular surface are crucial for maintaining good visual function [Amano et al 2006]. Of note, surgical treatment of neurotrophic keratitis has not been successful as poor outcomes of lateral tarsorrhaphy, corneal patch graft, and penetrating keratoplasty have been reported [Yagev et al 1999]. Skin. Daily care with a skin moisturizer is recommended to prevent or reduce skin cracking which can lead to bruising, and skin infections, which can progress to more significant infections such as cellulitis or osteomyelitis. Parents or guardians should practice skin care to prevent serious infections, including daily observation of the whole skin surface and early treatment of even minor skin lesions. Behavior. Interventions for behavioral, developmental and motor delays as well as educational and social support for school-age children and adolescents are important. Although irritability, hyperactivity, impulsivity, and acting-out behaviors typically improve with age, medications for antipsychotic and/or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in conjunction with behavior modification may be beneficial. The advantages and disadvantages should be weighed for each individual with CIPA.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Dental care includes the following: Regular dental examinations and restriction of sweets to prevent dental caries Early treatment of dental caries and periodontal disease to prevent osteomyelitis of the mandible. During surgical procedures, the following potential complications need to be considered and avoided: Inadequate sedation. The congenital absence of peripheral pain fibers may result in analgesia, but inadequate sedation in the postoperative period may trigger unexpected movement, causing secondary injuries. Therefore, tachycardia and hypertension in the postoperative period should raise consideration of the possibility of inadequate sedation. Hyper- or hypothermia. Temperature needs to be monitored carefully during the perioperative period; heating blankets should not be used. Of note, the use of muscle relaxants during surgery is not a problem as malignant hyperthermia has not been associated with HSAN [Tomioka et al 2002].

Surveillance

 Appropriate surveillance includes: Daily evaluation by parents and caregivers for early signs of otherwise unrecognized injury; Regular examinations by specialists in pediatrics, orthopedics, dentistry, ophthalmology, and dermatology to identify serious injuries and initiate early treatment; Annual follow up at a center that fosters comprehensive care and communication between the various subspecialties that are needed for optimal care.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Hot or cold environments; hot or cold foods; hot showers or baths Jumping or high-impact activities and sports

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 If the pathogenic variants in a family are known, molecular genetic testing may be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk infants so that those who are affected can be monitored to avoid: Hyperpyrexia and its potential complications, including febrile seizures; Injuries to the tongue, lips, and teeth when the primary teeth erupt. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, monitor the body temperature of at-risk infants during the neonatal period (i.e., first 28 days of life). See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.