http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hsan2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type II (HSAN2) the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic examination to determine extent of sensory loss and involvement of autonomic and motor nervous system Nerve conduction velocity (NCV) Detailed family history Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment is symptomatic and often involves a team including neurologists, orthopedic surgeons, and physiotherapists. Training in the care of the sensory-impaired limb is important and includes self-examination especially of the feet for any signs of trauma. A diabetic clinic is a good source of advice. Appropriate shoes and socks are recommended. It is best to prevent callous formation in neuropathic skin; once present, calluses should be treated with hydration and lipid-based unguents to prevent cracking and may require medical consultation. Cleaning and protection of wounds on neuropathic limbs in combination with antiseptic treatment to eradicate infections help prevent osteomyelitis and amputations.

Surveillance

 The feet in particular should be inspected daily for injuries and sources of wear. Patients should be followed annually by centers with comprehensive care for diabetes and/or CMT.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid ill-fitting shoes or other sources of trauma to the feet or hands (e.g., use protective gloves when handling hot items when cooking).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk sibs in early childhood in order to identify those who will develop sensory loss and would benefit from measures to prevent injury to limbs and/or self-mutilation. Molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs if the pathogenic variants in the family are known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.