http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hsn1

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary sensory neuropathy type IA, the following assessments are recommended: Feet, ankles, and hands re the condition of the skin Joints for evidence of Charcot joints Strength Loss of sweating and compensatory patchy hyperhydrosis Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Wounds on neuropathic limbs heal if they are clean and protected and the limb is rested. Principles of treatment are the same as for leprosy surgery; see Warren & Nade [1999]. Foot drop can be treated with ankle/foot orthotics (AFOs), but these need sleeving with stockings or some form of second skin to prevent skin abrasion. Charcot joints may require arthrodesis. Shooting pains are difficult to treat and only partial relief can be obtained with carbamazepine, gabapentin, or amitryptiline, or a combination of an antiepileptic and an antidepressant. Opiates are contraindicated as HSN1A is a chronic disorder.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Foot ulcers are frequently caused by breakdown of callus. Therefore, it is important to prevent callus formation by removing sources of pressure and to treat existing callus by softening the skin. Routine foot care by a diabetic clinic or by a podiatrist instructed to treat as for a diabetic foot is recommended. Burns can be prevented by using gloves as needed (e.g., during cooking). A diabetic education clinic is an excellent source of advice regarding skin care.

Surveillance

Feet should be inspected at least daily for injuries or sources of wear.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Opiates are contraindicated as this is a chronic disorder.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Penno et al [2010] found that HSN1A-causing pathogenic variants in SPTLC1 result in decreased specificity of the active site of the enzyme, allowing alanine and glycine into the active site and producing neurotoxic sphingoid bases. The finding suggests that HSN1A is caused by these toxic products and opens an avenue for possible (at present, experimental) therapeutic approaches. Addition of serine to the diet of an HSN1 animal model and to 14 humans with HSN1 was effective in reducing plasma levels of the toxic deoxysphingolipids [Garofalo et al 2011]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.