http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hsp

Management



Treatment of Manifestations



At present, there is no specific treatment to prevent or reverse nerve degeneration in HSP. Treatments are directed at reducing symptoms and improving balance, strength, and agility. Current recommendations:

Daily regimen of physical therapy directed toward improving cardiovascular fitness, maintaining and improving muscle strength and gait, and reducing spasticity is recommended.

Occupational therapy, assistive walking devices, and ankle-foot orthotics are often used.

Drugs to reduce muscle spasticity (e.g., Lioresal® [oral or intrathecal], tizanidine, dantrolene, Botox® injections) and reduce urinary urgency (e.g., oxybutynin)

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Daily regimen of physical therapy is recommended to improve cardiovascular fitness, maintain and improve muscle strength and gait, and reduce spasticity.

Surveillance



Patients should be evaluated periodically (annually or as needed) by a neurologist and physiatrist to assess progression and develop treatment strategies to maximize walking ability and reduce symptoms.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Exposure to medications or chemicals that cause neuropathy should be avoided if possible.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



HSP symptoms generally do not change significantly during pregnancy (although, if medications such as baclofen are reduced or discontinued during pregnancy, spasticity may be increased). In general, uncomplicated HSP does not pose increased risk for pregnancy, labor, or delivery. In general, having uncomplicated HSP does not increase risk associated with obstetric anesthesia.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.