

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Huntington disease (HD), the following evaluations are recommended: Physical examination Neurologic assessment Assessment of the full range of motor, cognitive, and psychiatric symptoms associated with HD. Among a range of clinical scoring systems that have been described, the Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale (HDRS) provides a reliable and consistent assessment of the clinical features and progression of HD. Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Pharmacologic therapy is limited to symptomatic treatment [Mestre et al 2009, Killoran & Biglan 2014]. Choreic movements can be partially suppressed by typical and atypical neuroleptics such as haloperidol and olanzapine respectively, benzodiazepines, or the monoamine-depleting agent tetrabenazine [de Tommaso et al 2005, Bonelli & Wenning 2006, Huntington Study Group 2006]. However, there is ongoing discussion regarding the best practices for the treatment of chorea [Armstrong & Miyasaki 2012, Reilmann et al 2014]. Anti-parkinsonian agents may ameliorate hypokinesia and rigidity, but may increase chorea. Psychiatric disturbances such as depression, psychotic symptoms, and outbursts of aggression generally respond well to psychotropic drugs or some types of antiepileptic drugs. Valproic acid has improved myoclonic hyperkinesia in Huntington disease [Saft et al 2006]. Supportive care with attention to nursing, diet, special equipment, and eligibility for state and federal benefits is much appreciated by individuals with HD and their families. Numerous social problems beset individuals with HD and their families; practical help, emotional support, and counseling can provide relief [Williams et al 2009].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Significant secondary complications of HD include the following: The complications typically observed with any individual requiring long-term supportive care The side effects associated with various pharmacologic treatments. Drug side effects are dependent on a variety of factors including the compound involved, the dosage, and the individual; but with the medications typically used in HD, side effects may include depression, sedation, nausea, restlessness, headache, neutropenia, and tardive dyskinesia. For some individuals, the side effects of certain therapeutics may be worse than the symptoms; such individuals would benefit from being removed from the treatment, having the dose reduced, or being 'rested' regularly from the treatment. Current medications used to treat chorea are particularly prone to significant side effects. Individuals with mild to moderate chorea may be better assisted with non-pharmacologic therapies such as movement training and speech therapy. Depression. Standard treatment is appropriate when indicated [Paulsen et al 2005b, Phillips et al 2008].

Surveillance

 Regular evaluations should be made to address the appearance and severity of chorea, rigidity, gait problems, depression, behavioral changes, and cognitive decline [Anderson & Marshall 2005, Skirton 2005]. The Behavior Observation Scale Huntington (BOSH) is a scale developed for the rapid and longitudinal assessment of functional abilities of persons with HD in a nursing home environment [Timman et al 2005]. For longitudinal studies, the Unified HD Rating Scale is used (UHDRS) [Huntington Study Group 1996, Siesling et al 1998, Youssov et al 2013]. The total functional capacity (TFC) scale is used to describe the progression of HD, the patient level of functioning, and requirements for additional caregiver aid (TFC scale).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 L-dopa-containing compounds may increase chorea. Alcohol and smoking are discouraged.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 A wide range of potential therapeutics are under investigation in both animal models of HD and human clinical trials [Wild & Tabrizi 2014]. This diversity reflects the variety of cellular pathways that are known to be perturbed in HD [Bonelli et al 2004, Rego & de Almeida 2005, Borrell-Pagès et al 2006, Graham et al 2006b, Bonelli & Hofmann 2007]. Pharmacologic agents being investigated include inhibitors of apoptosis, excitotoxicity, huntingtin aggregation, huntingtin proteolysis, huntingtin phosphorylation, inflammation, oxidative damage, phosphodiesterase activity, histone deacetylase inhibitors, and transglutaminase activity as well as compounds that modulate mitochondrial function, chaperone activity,transcription, and neurotrophic support. Therapeutics that have shown improvements in mouse models of HD and are in preliminary trials include minocycline, sodium butyrate, essential fatty acids, racemide, creatine, cystamine, riluzole, and memantine [Walker & Raymond 2004, Bender et al 2005, Puri et al 2005, Bonelli & Wenning 2006, Hersch et al 2006, Okamoto et al 2009]. Several gene silencing therapies are being developed, including approaches using RNA interference (RNAi) or antisense-oligonucleotides (ASOs) [Pfister & Zamore 2009, Aronin & DiFiglia 2014]. Some methods aim to silence all huntingtin expression, while others are allele-specific [Matsui & Corey 2012, Skotte et al 2014; Southwell et al 2014] and aim to target only the pathogenic variant, leading to personalized therapy for HD [Kay et al 2014]. Neural transplantation studies in HD have shown variable results with small numbers of individuals [Furtado et al 2005, Bachoud-Lévi et al 2006, Farrington et al 2006, Dunnett & Rosser 2007, Barker et al 2013]. However additional larger studies are underway [Lopez et al 2014]. Of concern, recent studies suggest that mutated huntingtin is capable of spreading into the allografted neural tissue [Cicchetti et al 2014]. Biomarker studies, such as TRACK-HD, PREDICT-HD and ENROLL-HD, are/have been conducted to identify early changes in disease progression using imaging, clinical scales, and physiologic measurements [Scahill et al 2012, Ross et al 2014]. Longitudinal studies of persons at risk for HD have also been performed [Huntington Study Group PHAROS Investigators 2006, Paulsen et al 2006]. Numerous human clinical trials are planned or underway for HD and are listed at www.huntington-study-group.org. A number of drug trials have been completed and/or are currently ongoing. For example, both a high-dose creatine trial and trials using SD-809 (a modified form of tetrabenazine [Xenazine®, Nitoman®]) are in Phase III clinical testing. A Phase II clinical trial is also underway for PBT2. For the most up-to-date information see hddrugworks.org. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Children and adolescents living with a parent affected with HD, sometimes in very deprived conditions, can have special problems. Referral to a local HD support group for educational material and needed psychological support is helpful (see Resources). At the present time cognitive impairment is not amenable to treatment. However, trials (including use of memantine as a treatment) are ongoing. Donepezil, a drug used to treat Alzheimer disease, has not improved motor or cognitive function in HD [Cubo et al 2006].