http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/husa

Management

 Current guidelines for the initial assessment and early management of children with aHUS have been published [Ariceta et al 2009] (full text).

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with genetic atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome (aHUS), the following evaluations are recommended: Renal function Creatinine clearance (i.e., glomerular filtration rate [GFR]) Serum concentration of creatinine resources Urinalysis Hematologic status Platelet count Erythrocyte count Search for schistocytes in the blood smear Leukocyte count Other Serum LDH concentration Haptoglobin Serum C3 and C4 concentrations Plasma concentrations of Bb and sC5b-9 Measure serum concentrations of CFH and CFI Assessment of CD46 expression on leukocytes Testing for CFH autoantibodies because affected individuals who have autoantibodies could benefit from an immunosuppressive therapy (see Treatment of Manifestations) Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Eculizumab has been shown to induce remission of acute episodes of aHUS refractory to plasma therapy and is now widely used as a first-line therapy to treat aHUS. Eculizumab should be considered as a first-line therapy when the diagnosis of aHUS is unequivocal, since this treatment has the potential to rescue renal function when administered early after onset of the disease [Zuber et al 2012a, Fakhouri et al 2013]. For further information about eculizumab, click here. Plasma infusion or exchange guidelines have been published for children [Ariceta et al 2009] and adults [Taylor et al 2010]. Cohort data show that response to plasma therapy was in part related to the genetic background of the treated patient [Noris et al 2010]. Despite the variability in response to therapy, plasma therapy is the only therapy with near-complete global availability and therefore it remains an important treatment for aHUS. Plasma therapy should be started as soon as aHUS is suspected and continued until resolution of thrombotic microangiopathy. In individuals who respond, plasma exchange can be gradually withdrawn, although a significant proportion will require continued plasma exchange to maintain remission. There is minimal evidence to suggest the superiority of either plasma exchange or plasma infusion, and instead the selected option should be based on individual tolerance, local expertise, and resources (e.g., a neonatal benefit from infusion vs exchange) [Nester et al 2015]. Plasma exchange usually involves exchanging 1-2 plasma volumes (40 mL/kg) per session in adults and 50-100 mL/kg in children. Typically, plasma exchange is undertaken daily initially; the duration and frequency of treatment is then determined by the clinical response. Treatment can be intensified by increasing the volume of plasma replaced. Twice-daily exchange of one plasma volume is probably the treatment of choice for those with refractory disease in order to minimize the recycling of infused plasma. Plasma infusion is the first-line therapy when plasma exchange or eculizumab therapies are not available. In plasma infusion 30-40 mL/kg of plasma is administered initially, followed by 10-20 mL/kg/day. Plasma infusion should be used to treat or prevent recurrent episodes. Platelet count and serum LDH concentration are the most sensitive markers for monitoring response to plasma therapy. Plasma treatment should be continued until platelet count and serum LDH concentration remain normal after therapy is discontinued. Discontinuation of plasma therapy is the only way to know if complete remission has been achieved. Immediate exacerbation of disease activity, principally manifested by falling platelet count that requires the resumption of daily plasma therapy, occurs in 29%-82% of individuals after treatment is discontinued. Thus, many cycles of stopping and resuming plasma therapy may occur, in which case therapy with eculizumab should be considered. Genetic characterization of persons with aHUS has the potential to optimize the treatment: C3. Response to plasma treatment in persons with C3 pathogenic variants was comparable (57%) to that in persons with CFH pathogenic variants [Noris et al 2010]. It is hypothesized that plasma exchange could remove mutated hyperactive C3 and also provide regulatory plasma proteins to counteract complement activation induced by mutated C3. CFB. Limited data are available on response of individuals with CFB pathogenic variants to treatment with plasma. Remission with plasma exchange or infusion has been reported in five individuals [Goicoechea de Jorge et al 2007, Roumenina et al 2009, Tawadrous et al 2010, Funato et al 2014]. CD46. The rationale for using plasma in individuals with CD46 pathogenic variants is not so clear, since the CD46 protein (also known as MCP) is a transmembrane protein and, theoretically, plasma infusion or plasma exchange would not compensate for the MCP defect. Published data indicate that the majority (80%-90%) of individuals undergo remission following plasma infusion or exchange [Richards et al 2003, Caprioli et al 2006]; however, complete recovery from the acute episode was also observed in 100% of individuals not treated with plasma [Noris et al 2010]. The decision whether or not to treat with plasma should be based on the clinical severity of the acute episode. CFH. Plasma infusion or exchange has been used in individuals with aHUS and CFH pathogenic variants with the rationale of providing normal CFH to compensate for the genetic deficiency, as CFH is a circulating plasma protein. In published studies, some individuals with CFH pathogenic variants did not respond at all to plasma therapy and died or developed ESRD. Others required infusion of plasma at weekly intervals in order to raise CFH plasma levels enough to maintain remission [Landau et al 2001]. Stratton and Warwicker [2002] were able to induce sustained remission in a patient with a CFH pathogenic variant by three months of weekly plasma exchange in conjunction with intravenous immunoglobulins. One year after discontinuation of plasma therapy, the patient remained disease free and dialysis independent. A dozen case reports showed that early plasma therapy, generally consisting of daily plasma exchange followed by maintenance plasma exchange/infusion, could prevent relapses and preserve renal function at follow up for up to six years [Loirat et al 2016]. In the authors' series [Caprioli et al 2006, Noris et al 2010], approximately 60% of individuals with CFH pathogenic variants treated with plasma underwent either complete or partial remission (hematologic normalization with renal sequelae). However, the remaining individuals did not respond at all to plasma and 20% died during the acute episode. In the French cohort [Frémeaux-Bacchi et al 2013] progression to ESRD during the first episode of aHUS was similar in children and adults with CFH pathogenic variants who received high-intensity plasma therapy compared to those who did not. CFH autoantibodies. In individuals with anti-CFH autoantibodies, plasma treatment induced complete or partial remission (normalization of hematologic parameters with renal sequelae) of 75% of episodes [Noris et al 2010]. Persons with anti-CFH autoantibodies benefit from treatment with steroids or other immunosuppressants in conjunction with plasma exchange. CFI. Theoretically one should expect a good response to plasma therapy in individuals with CFI pathogenic variants because CFI (like CFH) is a circulating protein; the results, however, suggest that a larger quantity of plasma is required to provide sufficient wild-type CFH or CFI to compensate for the genetic deficiency [Caprioli et al 2006]. Indeed, remission was achieved in only 25% of episodes treated with plasma in persons with CFI pathogenic variants [Noris et al 2010]. DGKE. Absence of evidence linking DGKE deficiency to the complement cascade and relapses of acute aHUS in affected individuals with pathogenic variants in DGKE while receiving plasma therapy suggest that this treatment may not benefit individuals with DGKE pathogenic variants [Lemaire et al 2013]. THBD. Plasma treatment induced disease remission in about 80% of acute episodes in persons with THBD pathogenic variants [Noris et al 2010]. Treatment with ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor antagonists helps to reduce renal disease progression to end-stage renal failure, while at the same time controlling blood pressure levels. Bilateral nephrectomy may serve as rescue therapy in selected individuals with extensive microvascular thrombosis at renal biopsy, refractory hypertension, and signs of hypertensive encephalopathy, in whom conventional therapies including plasma manipulation are not adequate to control the disease (i.e., persistent severe thrombocytopenia and hemolytic anemia). Follow up has been excellent in some individuals [Ruggenenti et al 2001]. Renal transplantation outcome is determined largely by the underlying genetic abnormality. An important advance has been the development of transplant protocols integrating eculizumab treatment [Nester et al 2011]. Eculizumab therapy may be used to treat post-transplantation aHUS recurrence, as reported in individuals with pathogenic variants in C3, CFH, and CFI [Zuber et al 2012b]. Eculizumab prophylactic therapy may also prevent post-transplantation aHUS recurrence (see Prevention of Secondary Complications). Molecular genetic testing can help to define graft prognosis; thus, all affected individuals should undergo such testing prior to transplantation. C3, CFB, and CFI. Graft failures secondary to recurrences occurred in one individual with a CFB pathogenic variant and in70% of individuals with CFI pathogenic variants. The percentage of graft failure was slightly lower (50%) in individuals with C3 pathogenic variants [Noris et al 2010]. CD46. Four individuals with isolated
CD46 pathogenic variants have undergone renal transplantation with no disease recurrence [Noris & Remuzzi 2005, Noris et al 2010]. The strong theoretic rationale is that because the CD46 protein (MCP) is a transmembrane protein that is highly expressed in the kidney, transplantation of a kidney expressing normal MCP corrects the defect. CFH. In individuals with CFH pathogenic variants the graft outcome is poor. Recurrence ranges from 30% to 100% and is significantly higher than in individuals without CFH pathogenic variants [Noris & Remuzzi 2010]. As CFH is mainly produced by the liver, kidney transplantation does not correct the CFH genetic defect in these individuals. Simultaneous kidney and liver transplantation has been performed in two young children with aHUS and CFH pathogenic variants [Noris & Remuzzi 2005]. However, following transplantation both children experienced premature irreversible liver failure. The first child recovered after a second uneventful liver transplantation. This child, who had had monthly recurrences of aHUS before transplantation, had no symptoms of aHUS for more than two years following transplantation. The second child expired after primary non-function of the liver graft followed by multiorgan failure. In six other individuals with CFH pathogenic variants and in one child heterozygous for pathogenic variants in two genes (CFH and CFI) who received simultaneous kidney and liver transplantation [Saland et al 2006, Saland et al 2009, Noris et al 2010], good renal and liver function were recorded at two-year follow up. In these individuals, extensive plasma exchange was given prior to surgery to provide enough normal CFH to prevent damage to the liver graft. DGKE. Three individuals with aHUS caused by pathogenic variants in DGKE received cadaveric renal transplantation at ages 2, 19, and 21 years [Lemaire et al 2013]. Two allografts have survived two years and four years, till last observation, whereas the other failed after six years due to chronic rejection. Importantly, there were no aHUS recurrences after transplantation. On the basis of these findings, it appears that renal transplantation can be efficacious and safe in individuals with aHUS caused by pathogenic variants in DGKE. THBD. One individual with THBD pathogenic variants had disease recurrence in the kidney graft – an unexpected occurrence, as thrombomodulin (like CD46) is an endothelial transmembrane protein. However, a soluble thrombomodulin form circulates in plasma and has functional activities similar to those of membrane-bound thrombomodulin. It is possible that the grafts were not sufficiently protected against complement activation because of dysfunctional soluble thrombomodulin in persons with THBD pathogenic variants [Noris et al 2010].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Plasma exchange prophylaxis has been shown to prevent disease recurrences in persons with mutation of CFH [Davin et al 2008]. Plasma exchange and eculizumab prophylaxis may prevent disease recurrences in those with mutation of circulating factors (CFH, C3, CFB, and CFI).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Eculizumab has a greater efficacy than plasma therapy in the prevention of thrombotic microangiopathic events, with earlier intervention associated with a greater clinical benefit [Legendre et al 2013]. Eculizumab can be used as a prophylactic treatment to prevent post-transplantation aHUS recurrence in those at moderate to high risk of recurrence, as defined below [Nester et al 2011, Weitz et al 2011, Krid et al 2012, Zuber et al 2012b]: Individuals with pathogenic variants in C3, CFB, and CFH or those who have the CFH-CFHR1 hybrid allele are at high risk for disease recurrence [Zuber et al 2012b]. Individuals with anti-CFH antibodies, pathogenic variants in CFI, variants of unknown functional significance, and/or no identified pathogenic variants are at moderate risk for disease recurrence [Zuber et al 2012b]. The major adverse effect of eculizumab is the increased risk for meningococcal infection [Rother et al 2007]. Vaccination against Neisseria meningitides (tetravalent vaccine A, C, Y, W135) is mandatory two weeks before administration of eculizumab. In those who are not vaccinated two weeks prior to therapy with eculizumab, daily prophylactic antibiotics (e.g., oral penicillin or a macrolide) should be administered for two weeks following vaccination. Since currently available vaccines do not cover all N meningitidis strains, a few countries require continuous antibiotic prophylaxis throughout eculizumab treatment. In children treated with eculizumab, vaccination against Streptococcus pneumonia and Haemophilus influenza type B infections is also required.

Surveillance

 Individuals with known aHUS. Measure serum concentration of hemoglobin, platelet count, and serum concentrations of creatinine, LDH, C3, and C4, and haptoglobin: Every month in the first year after an aHUS episode, then every three to six months in the following years, particularly for persons with normal renal function or chronic renal insufficiency as they are at risk for relapse. Note: Individuals with ESRD usually do not relapse. Every two weeks for those rare individuals with homozygous CFH pathogenic variants that result in very low or undetectable levels of the CFH protein Note: The proposed time intervals for checking hemoglobin, platelet count, and serum concentrations of creatinine, LDH, C3, C4, and haptoglobin are suggestions [Authors, personal observation]; each center may follow different guidelines based on their own experience.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Discontinue cyclosporine or tacrolimus when aHUS develops following challenge with the medication. Fresh frozen plasma should be avoided (i.e., plasma therapy is contraindicated) in persons with aHUS induced by Streptococcus pneumoniae because plasma from an adult contains antibodies against the Thomsen-Friedenreich antigen, which may exacerbate the disease. It is preferable to transfuse washed red blood cells or platelets. There is no evidence that plasmapheresis is of value [Copelovitch & Kaplan 2008]. Avoid potential precipitants of aHUS, including the following known triggers of aHUS: Pregnancy Medications. Some chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., mitomycin C, cisplatin, daunorubimicin, cytosine arabinoside), immunotherapeutic agents (e.g., cyclosporin and tacrolimus), antiplatelet agents (e.g., ticlopidine and clopidogrel), oral contraceptives, and anti-inflammatory agents

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Molecular genetic testing should be offered to at-risk family members of persons in whom a pathogenic variant(s) has been identified. Note: Testing of family members needs to be done with caution because presence of the family-specific pathogenic variant(s) is predisposing rather than causative, and thus is only one of several risk factors required for development of aHUS. Predictions based on a single risk factor in unaffected individuals are unreliable (see Penetrance). Therefore, risk cannot be quantified for a given individual. The following are appropriate for relatives in whom the family-specific pathogenic variant(s) have been identified: Monitoring of hemoglobin, platelet count, and serum concentrations of creatinine, LDH, C3, C4, and haptoglobin) when exposed to potential triggering events such as severe infections, inflammation, and pregnancy (see Surveillance) Avoidance of known precipitants of aHUS (see Clinical Description) No monitoring is needed for: Relatives in whom no family-specific pathogenic variant has been identified; Relatives of persons in whom no pathogenic variant has been identified. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Women with a history of aHUS are at increased risk for aHUS flare during pregnancy and an even greater risk in the post-partum period. Pregnancy-associated aHUS (P-aHUS) occurred in 21 of 100 adult women with aHUS, with 79% presenting post partum [Fakhouri et al 2010]. Treatment consisted mainly of plasma exchange, and the outcomes were poor with 62% developing end-stage renal disease by one month after presentation and 76% by last follow up. The risk for P-aHUS was highest during a second pregnancy. Complement abnormalities were found in 18 of the 21 adult women with P-aHUS. Pregnancies in affected women with complement abnormalities were complicated by fetal loss (in 4.8%) and preeclampsia (7.7%). On the basis of these results, women with complement dysregulation should be informed of the 20% risk for P-aHUS, and any pregnancy in these women should be closely monitored. As for eculizumab, the experience gained from pregnant women with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria who had been treated with eculizumab suggest a risk-benefit balance in favor of eculizumab use [Kelly et al 2010]. Similarly, recent data showed that eculizumab can be successfully used for the treatment of aHUS during pregnancy [Ardissino et al 2013, Cañigral et al 2014, De Sousa Amorim et al 2015].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Research efforts are aimed at identifying more specific approaches that may interfere with the primary cause of microangiopathy in the different forms of aHUS. For aHUS associated with CFH pathogenic variants: Specific replacement therapies with recombinant CFH protein could become a viable alternative to plasma treatment. Efforts are also ongoing to isolate plasma fractions enriched in CFH protein that could provide sufficient active CFH while minimizing the risk of allergy and fluid overload associated with standard plasma infusion therapy. A CFH protein concentrate under development for clinical use has recently achieved Orphan Drug designation by European Medicines Agency (EMEA) and the FDA. The discovery of pathogenic variants in three different complement-regulatory genes provides sufficient evidence to undertake clinical trials using complement inhibitors that block the activation of C3 [Kirschfink 2001]. Studies on other complement-regulatory genes would help to clarify the molecular determinants underlying the pathogenesis of aHUS and potentially improve management and therapy. Advances in vector safety and transfection efficiency may eventually make gene therapy a realistic option. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Plasma-resistant/plasma-dependent disease. Some individuals with aHUS are plasma resistant (i.e., they do not achieve remission despite plasma therapy); some become plasma dependent, experiencing disease relapse as soon as plasma infusion or exchange is stopped. Splenectomy – while it induces remission in some persons with plasma resistance – is ineffective and actually increased morbidity and mortality in others. Other treatments including antiplatelet agents, prostacyclin, heparin or fibrinolytic agents, steroids, and intravenous immunoglobulins have been attempted in both plasma resistance and plasma dependence with no consistent benefit [Ruggenenti et al 2001].