http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hyper-nfj2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with ADTKD-REN, the following evaluations are recommended: Hemoglobin concentration to document the level of anemia Serum uric acid concentration to identify persons at risk for gout A 24-hour urine collection to quantify urine output and determine if polyuria is present (although this can usually determined by history). Clinical questioning regarding enuresis (bed-wetting) or frequent thirst or urination will help establish a diagnosis of polyuria. A standard basic metabolic panel to determine if hyperkalemia is present Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Anemia may be reversed by treatment with erythropoietin [Zivná et al 2009], a medication that is given subcutaneously and managed by hematologists or pediatric nephrologists. Dose is based on response to therapy. There is no clear target at this time and it is left to the discretion of the hematologist or nephrologist. Many children have relatively mild anemia with hemoglobin levels of 10 to 11 g/dL, and can be safely followed off of erythropoietin. Note: The dose of erythropoietin will need to be reduced as hemoglobin concentration increases during adolescence. Hyperuricemia/gout. Gout typically responds well to prednisone or colchicine. One should not use of nonsteroidal agents in individuals with ADTKD-REN because the combination of nonsteroidal agents and the low renin state in patients with ADTKD-REN can lead to acute kidney injury; prednisone is the preferable alternative. Prevention of future gout attacks with allopurinol or probenecid should be considered in individuals with gout. With allopurinol treatment, serum uric acid concentration returns to normal and gout attacks can be entirely prevented. Lifelong therapy with allopurinol may be required. In individuals with allergies or intolerance to allopurinol, febuxostat may be considered; however, no data on the use of this medication in REN-associated kidney disease are available. Hypotension and mild hyperkalemia may be present in children and young adults with this condition. As chronic kidney disease progresses to stage III chronic kidney disease, hypertension may develop, and hyperkalemia is due not to low plasma renin activity but rather to decreased elimination of potassium by the kidneys. Therefore, treatment of low plasma renin activity/plasma concentration of aldosterone may be indicated prior to the development of stage III chronic kidney disease. Such treatment may include liberal sodium intake if the patient has mild hypotension and hyperkalemia but preserved kidney function. Dietary sodium intake of 3-4 g/day may prevent hypotension. Note: A low-sodium diet should not be used in persons with ADTKD-REN. If hyperkalemia is present, treatment with fludrocortisone or potassium restriction may be indicated [Bleyer et al 2010b]. Fludrocortisone treatment (0.1 mg orally/day) of one affected child with low plasma renin activity resulted in a mild rise in blood pressure, correction of mild hyperkalemia, and a significant improvement in estimated glomerular filtration rate that may have been hemodynamically mediated [Bleyer at al 2010b]. The use of fludrocortisone may also prevent hypotension that could result from volume depletion such as that associated with viral syndromes or vigorous activities associated with excessive perspiration. Note: Fludrocortisone treatment in two adults with advanced kidney disease had no clinical effect [Author, personal observation]. Fludrocortisone could have the advantage of decreasing renin production (through negative feedback), and thus the production of the abnormal renin deposits. However, since blockade of the renin angiotensin system and aldosterone production has been a general treatment of chronic kidney disease, it is possible that increased serum concentration of aldosterone may increase progression of renal disease. Thus, while the use of fludrocortisone may potentially be beneficial in this condition, at present its use is at the discretion of the clinician. Mineralocorticoid replacement. Recommendations regarding treatment are not evidence based due to the small number of individuals with this disorder and the limited experience treating affected individuals. Renal disease. Referral to a nephrologist is indicated to monitor kidney function, evaluate for manifestations of chronic kidney disease, and prepare for renal replacement therapy when renal insufficiency occurs. Renal replacement therapies such as hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis replace renal function but are associated with potential complications. Kidney transplantation cures ADTKD-REN. The transplanted kidney does not develop the disease.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Treatment with erythropoietin can reverse anemia [Zivná et al 2009]. Treatment of hyperuricemia with allopurinol can prevent development of gout.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Iron stores should be replenished as needed to treat iron deficiency (an unrelated condition) if it is present.

Surveillance

 Measure hemoglobin concentration and serum concentration of uric acid and creatinine annually starting at the time of diagnosis.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 The use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) should be avoided, especially in persons who are dehydrated. The use of NSAIDs in a febrile child with ADTKD-REN precipitated acute renal failure [Bleyer et al 2010b]. The use of other analgesics/antipyretics should be considered. It would appear that the use of an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor may not be beneficial in the treatment of chronic kidney failure and could aggravate the underlying relative renin deficit. Volume depletion and dehydration may worsen hyperuricemia and lead to more frequent attacks of gout. High meat and seafood intake could exacerbate gout. Exertion under extreme conditions (e.g., physical exertion when it is hot) should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic relatives of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing for the familial REN pathogenic variant in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Particularly important are: Children because of their increased risk for anemia; Adolescents because of their increased risk for gout, which can be prevented with allopurinol treatment; Relatives interested in donating a kidney to an affected family member. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Successful pregnancies have been documented in women with a REN pathogenic variant. The rate of miscarriages or other adverse outcomes was not increased.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.