http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hyper-pp

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (hyperPP), the following evaluations are recommended: Determine neurologic status Perform 1H MRI (STIR) of proximal leg muscles to identify muscular water accumulation and fatty muscle degeneration [Weber et al 2006]. Edema should be extruded with long-term diuretics; evaluate by muscle strength measurement and MRI four weeks after start of treatment. Consult with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment for hyperPP is symptomatic and not curative. Attacks can often be prevented or aborted by continuing mild exercise and/or oral ingestion of carbohydrates at the onset of weakness (e.g., 2 g glucose per kg body weight). Attacks occur more frequently on holidays and weekends when people rest in bed longer than usual Individuals are advised to rise early and have a full breakfast. In some individuals attacks can be aborted or attenuated by intravenously injected glucocorticoids or the inhalation of two puffs of 0.1 mg salbutamol. Both mild exercise and treatment with β2-stimulating agents appear to work by stimulating the Na+K+-pumps [Clausen et al 2011]. Calcium gluconate (0.5-2 g taken intravenously) may terminate attacks in some individuals [Lehmann-Horn et al 2004].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Diet/environment. Preventive therapy for individuals with hyperPP consists of frequent meals rich in carbohydrates and avoidance of the following: Potassium-rich medications and foods (e.g., fruits, fruit juices) Fasting Strenuous work Exposure to cold Diuretics. It is often advisable to prevent hyperkalemic attacks of weakness by the continuous use of a thiazide diuretic or a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, such as acetazolamide or the recently approved medication dichlorphenamide. Diuretics are used in modest dosages at intervals from twice daily to twice weekly. Thiazide diuretics are preferable because they have fewer side effects than either acetazolamide or dichlorphenamide therapy. The dosage should be kept as low as possible (e.g., 25 mg hydrochlorothiazide daily or every other day). In severe cases, 50 mg or 75 mg of hydrochlorothiazide should be taken daily very early in the morning. Individuals should be monitored so that the serum potassium concentration does not fall below 3.3 mmol/L or the serum sodium concentration below 135 mmol/L [Lehmann-Horn et al 2004].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 General anesthesia. Opioids or depolarizing agents such as potassium, anticholinesterases, and succinylcholine can aggravate a myotonic reaction and induce masseter spasms and stiffness of respiratory muscles. Intubation and mechanical ventilation may be impaired. Also, alterations of serum osmolarity, pH, and hypothermia-induced muscle shivering and mechanical stimuli can exacerbate the myotonic reaction. An induction sequence incorporating inhalation of oxygen, cricoid pressure, thiamyal or thiopental, and two times the ED95 dose of an intermediate or short-action non-depolarizing muscle relaxant, followed by intubation, is a reasonable approach to securing the airway in persons with myotonia. Alternatively, inhalational induction may be a possibility for hyperkalemic paralysis and is well tolerated in those undergoing elective surgery. Following administration of general anesthesia, the affected individual may develop respiratory distress in the recovery room resulting from weakness of respiratory muscles in addition to generalized weakness lasting for hours. The weakness is aggravated by drugs that depress respiration and by the hypothermia induced by anesthesia. To prevent such attacks, glucose should be infused, a normal body temperature maintained, and serum potassium kept at low level [Klingler et al 2005, Mackenzie et al 2006, Jurkat-Rott & Lehmann-Horn 2007, Barker 2010]. Note: Because the generalized muscle spasms associated with such attacks may lead to an increase in body temperature, individuals with hyperPP have been considered to be susceptible to malignant hyperthermia. Most likely, anesthesia-related complications suggestive of a malignant hyperthermia crisis result from severe myotonic reactions [Lehmann-Horn et al 2004, Klingler et al 2005].

Surveillance

 The frequency of consultations needs to be adapted to the individual's clinical features and the response to preventive treatment. During prophylactic treatment, measure serum potassium concentration twice per year to avoid severe diuretic-induced hypokalemia. Neurologic examination with attention to muscle strength in the legs should be performed, in order to detect permanent weakness. Permanent weakness requires continuous medication, eg. with a thiazide diuretic, and MRI of the leg muscles once every one to three years. During treatment, serum potassium concentration should be measured twice per year to avoid severe diuretic-induced hypokalemia. The value should be between 3.0 and 3.5 mmol/L. Annual monitoring of thyroid function is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 See Prevention of Primary Manifestations and Prevention of Secondary Complications.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of preventive measures, particularly those that would decrease the risk of unexpected acute paralysis or anesthetic events. Molecular genetic testing can be pursued if the pathogenic variant in the family is known. When the results of genetic testing or presymptomatic testing are not known, the related family members must be considered at risk for complications and precautions are indicated, particularly during anesthesia. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 More than 90% of affected women report an increase in attack frequency during pregnancy. While approximately 80% reported improved muscle weakness during attacks, 75% also reported worse muscle stiffness during attacks [Charles et al 2013]. Women who are chronically treated with a diuretic may continue treatment in pregnancy. Human data on prenatal exposure to acetazolamide have not demonstrated an increased risk of fetal malformations. Human data on the use of oral dichlorphenamide therapy during pregnancy – and whether it leads to an increased risk of malformations in exposed fetuses – are limited.

Therapies Under Investigation

 A study that compared treatment with dichlorphenamide to treatment with placebo for prevention of episodes and for improvement of strength in individuals with hyperPP and hypoPP has recently been completed; for results, see ClinicalTrials.gov. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Whether the spontaneous attacks of weakness usually associated with hyperPP are influenced by mexiletine (the drug of choice for several allelic disorders) is unknown. No data concerning the influence of therapeutic drugs on the development of the myopathy are available. Cation exchangers are less beneficial than diuretics in treating hyperPP because they result in more severe side effects.