http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hypochondroplasia

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Evaluation of children with hypochondroplasia usually does not differ significantly from the evaluation of children with normal stature except for genetic counseling issues and dealing with parental concerns about short stature. However, because the phenotype of FGFR3 hypochondroplasia may overlap with that of achondroplasia, recommendations for the management of achondroplasia as outlined by the American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Genetics [Trotter et al 2005] should be considered in children with hypochondroplasia who exhibit more severe phenotypic features. These recommendations include but are not limited to the following: Medical genetics consultation Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference and plotting on achondroplasia-standardized growth curves Neurologic examination for signs of spinal cord compression, with referral to a pediatric neurologist or neurosurgeon if needed Screening developmental assessment History for evidence of sleep apnea, with formal sleep study if suggestive MRI or CT examination of the foramen magnum if clinical findings of severe hypotonia, spinal cord compression, or central sleep apnea as demonstrated through a sleep study are present Evaluation for thoracic or lumbar gibbus in the presence of truncal weakness Examination for leg bowing, with orthopedic referral if bowing interferes with walking Speech evaluation at diagnosis or by age two years Observation for symptoms suggestive of epilepsy, with referral to a pediatric neurologist when indicated

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of short stature is influenced by parental expectations and concerns. Final adult height in hypochondroplasia is considerably greater than that achieved in achondroplasia and therefore, functional limitations in society (e.g., operating an elevator, driving a car, using an automatic teller machine) are generally less severe or not an issue. One reasonable approach is to address the parents' expectations and prejudices regarding the height of their child rather than attempting to treat the child. Developmental intervention and special educational input are appropriate, as indicated by deficiencies. The usual neurosurgical approach to spinal stenosis is laminectomy. Thomeer & van Dijk [2002] determined that about 70% of symptomatic individuals with achondroplasia experienced total relief of symptoms following decompression without laminectomy. The L2-3 level most commonly required decompression. Making the family aware of support groups, such as the Little People of America Inc. (LPA), can result in assistance with adaptation of the affected individual and the family to short stature through peer support, personal example, and social awareness programs. The LPA offers information on employment, education, disability rights, adoption of children of short stature, medical issues, suitable clothing, adaptive devices, and parenting through local meetings, workshops, seminars, and a national newsletter. Seizure disorders should be treated in the standard manner.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are appropriate: Standard management of frequent middle ear infections Consideration of surgery if neurologic status is affected by spinal cord compression

Surveillance

Height, weight, and head circumference should be monitored using achondroplasia-standardized growth curves. Because an increased prevalence of mild-to-moderate intellectual disability and/or learning disabilities in children with hypochondroplasia appears likely, developmental milestones should be followed closely during early childhood and a timely referral to an appropriate professional made if there are any indications of learning difficulties during school-age years. Neurologic examination for signs of spinal cord compression should be performed at routine well-child visits, with referral to a pediatric neurologist if needed. History for evidence of sleep apnea should be taken at routine visits, with formal sleep study obtained when indicated. MRI or CT examination of the foramen magnum is indicated if there is evidence of severe hypotonia, spinal cord compression or central sleep apnea. Affected individuals should be evaluated for emerging leg bowing at routine visits, with orthopedic referral if bowing interferes with walking. Social adjustment should be monitored.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes. 
Pregnancy Management There is a paucity of literature regarding pregnancy management in women with skeletal dysplasias. However, a number of women with hypochondroplasia have had unremarkable pregnancies and deliveries. In comparison to women who have achondroplasia, vaginal deliveries are possible, although for each pregnancy, pelvic outlet capacity should be assessed in relation to fetal head size. Epidural or spinal anesthetic can be utilized, but a consultation with an anesthesiologist prior to delivery is recommended to assess the spinal anatomy. If present, spinal stenosis may be aggravated during pregnancy due to the normal physiologic changes to the shape of the spine that occur as gestation progresses.

Therapies Under Investigation

Growth hormone therapy. Trials of growth hormone therapy in hypochondroplasia have shown mixed results. These differences in individual responses published prior to gene discovery in 1995 [Appan et al 1990, Bridges et al 1991, Mullis et al 1991, Bridges & Brook 1994] may have resulted from genetic heterogeneity and indicate a need for stratification of affected individuals with regard to genetic etiology (e.g., those with FGFR3 mutations and those without). Meyer et al [2003] emphasized the importance of considering pubertal development in assessing the response to growth hormone stimulation testing. Tanaka et al [2003] reported data suggesting that children with hypochondroplasia may have a greater response to growth hormone therapy than children with achondroplasia. Pinto et al [2012] treated 19 children with hypochondroplasia (11/19 with confirmed FGFR3 mutations, mean age 9.0+/-3.0 years) with human recombinant growth hormone over a three-year period. Their mean height increased 1.32+/-1.05 standard deviation score (SDS) compared to a historical cohort of 40 untreated individuals with hypochondroplasia. Rothenbuhler et al [2012] treated six children with hypochondroplasia (confirmed FGFR3 p.Asn540Lys substitution, mean age 2.6+/-0.7 years) with human recombinant growth hormone over a six-year period. Their mean height SDS increased by 1.9 during the study period, and trunk/leg disproportion was improved. Since data about final adult height in growth hormone-treated individuals with hypochondroplasia are not available, the ultimate success of this approach remains uncertain. Growth hormone therapy should still be considered experimental and controversial in this condition. Surgical limb lengthening procedures have been used to treat achondroplasia and hypochondroplasia for more than 15 years. Although the complication rate was high initially, outcomes have steadily improved and significant increases in overall height have been reported [Yasui et al 1997, Lie & Chow 2009]. Nevertheless, the procedure is very invasive and entails considerable disability and discomfort over a long period of time. While some advocate performing the procedure during childhood, many pediatricians, geneticists, and ethicists advocate postponement until adolescence, when the affected individual is able to make an informed decision. Surgical limb lengthening is controversial, but is achieving greater acceptance with fewer complications as larger numbers of operations have been performed. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.