

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with incontinentia pigmenti (IP), the following evaluations are recommended: Physical examination with particular emphasis on the skin, hair, nails, and neurologic system to establish the presence and extent of manifestations Medical genetics consultation for diagnosis, treatment plan, testing, and family counseling Involvement of a pediatric dermatologist for diagnosis, and for management of significantly involved cases Prompt examination by an ophthalmologist familiar with IP and/or diseases of the retina for evidence of retinal neovascularization EEG and MRI if seizures, other neurologic abnormalities, or retinal hypervascularization are present [Wolf et al 2005, Pascual-Castroviejo et al 2006] Magnetic resonance angiography, potentially useful in identifying cerebrovascular lesions if the neurologic deficit is consistent with a stroke-like pattern Developmental screening, with further evaluation if significant delays are identified

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment includes the following: Management of blisters in a standard manner (i.e., not opening them, avoiding trauma); topical treatment (e.g., medications, oatmeal baths) to relieve discomfort. Significant skin involvement may benefit from dermatology management. Treatment of infections as for any other cellulitis For retinal neovascularization that predisposes to retinal detachment, cryotherapy and laser photocoagulation [Wong et al 2004] Standard treatment for retinal detachment Referral to a pediatric neurologist for evaluation if microcephaly, seizures, spasticity, or focal deficits are present Brain MRI in any child with functional neurologic abnormalities or retinal neovascularization [Wolf et al 2005, Pascual-Castroviejo et al 2006] Referral to a pedodontist at age six months or when teeth erupt, whichever comes first. Dental implants have been performed as early as age seven years (as in children with ectodermal dysplasia, who have similar dental problems (see Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia). Referral to a speech pathologist and/or pediatric nutritionist if delayed or inadequate eruption of primary teeth interferes with chewing and/or speech development Appropriate developmental stimulation and special education as indicated for developmental delay

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Management in the newborn period is aimed at reducing the risk of infection of blisters using standard medical management: not rupturing sealed blisters, keeping the areas clean while they are healing, and careful monitoring for excessive inflammation and signs of systemic involvement. The parents should be instructed about the possibility of retinal detachment particularly in children younger than age seven years; any apparent changes in vision or any evidence of acquired strabismus should be evaluated promptly. Head trauma may precipitate retinal detachment; therefore, any evaluation for head trauma should include a thorough eye examination.

Surveillance

 No schedule for eye examinations has been established, but the following has been suggested [Holmström & Thoren 2000]: Monthly until age three to four months Every three months between ages four months and one year Every six months between ages one and three years Annually after age three years Neurologic function should be assessed at routine visits with a pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, or developmental pediatrician. Ongoing evaluation by a pedodontist or dentist is appropriate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures (routine eye examinations). If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives. If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, physical examination, including examination of the skin, teeth, hair, nails, retina and CNS, can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

 Overall pregnancy health and management usually does not vary from normal. The risk of spontaneous abortion is higher than population rates, but management of pregnancy loss is done in the standard manner. For women with retinal problems, delivery management to minimize or eliminate labor should be considered to avoid retinal detachment.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.