http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ibm

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with GNE-related myopathy, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment is symptomatic only:

Individuals with GNE-related myopathy may benefit from consultation with physiatrists, physiotherapists, and occupational therapists.

Foot drop bracing and other mechanical aids may improve the function of individuals with GNE-related myopathy.

Consultation with a pulmonologist to evaluate for nocturnal hypoventilation or sleep apnea may be considered in symptomatic individuals.

All affected individuals should consult their physician before beginning an exercise program.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



No treatment that reverses or slows the natural history of muscle weakness in GNE-related myopathy is available.

Surveillance



Annual routine follow-up with the multidisciplinary team is recommended. Affected individuals should be screened for signs and symptoms of cardiac dysfunction, as two affected siblings with cardiomyopathy have been reported [Chai et al 2011]. Affected individuals should also be evaluated for respiratory dysfunction, with appropriate investigations and treatment as needed.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



It may be prudent to use medications/drugs with potential myotoxicity (for example: colchicine) with caution.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Related Genetic Counseling Issues for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Several therapies are under investigation for GNE-related myopathy including oral sialic acid or its metabolites, intravenous immune globulin and gene replacement therapy.

Some investigators believe that the reduction of the sialylation status of glycoproteins in muscle of individuals with GNE-related myopathy is causative of the disease [Huizing et al 2004, Noguchi et al 2004, Saito et al 2004]. Muscle atrophy and weakness in a mouse model of GNE-related myopathy are prevented by administration of sialic acid metabolites [Malicdan et al 2009]. Several oral exogenous forms of sialic acid (e.g., sialic acid-extended release and N-acetylmannosaminic acid) are currently being investigated in clinical trials for human GNE-related myopathy (see ClinicalTrials.gov for details).

Intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) is a glycoprotein which can be metabolized by neuraminidase to provide free sialic acid. A single trial of IVIG in four affected individuals resulted in mild improvement in muscle strength [Sparks et al 2007].

A single affected individual has been treated with intramuscular injections of a GNE expression vector in a lipoplex vehicle [Nemunaitis et al 2010]. The same person was later treated with intravenous infusion of the GNE-lipoplex preparation [Nemunaitis et al 2011]. No conclusions can yet be made about the efficacy of such treatment. Reported side effects of the latter treatment included low-grade fever, tachycardia, myalgia, transaminase elevation, hyponatremia, and hypotension. Further studies are required before these therapies will be available for widespread use.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.