

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with inclusion body myopathy with Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD), the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment of muscle strength, muscle wasting and tendon reflexes. EMG and/or muscle biopsy may be necessary. Baseline pulmonary function studies Cardiac evaluation by echocardiogram and ECG Blood alkaline phosphatase, urine pyridinoline studies and, if indicated, skeletal x-ray or bone scan studies to evaluate distribution and severity of Paget disease of the bone Baseline neuropsychological studies of behavior and mental status

Treatment of Manifestations

 Individuals benefit from care by a multidisciplinary team that includes: a neurologist, endocrinologist with expertise in Paget disease, specially trained nurses, pulmonologist, speech therapist, physical therapist, occupational therapist, respiratory therapist, nutritionist, psychologist, social worker, and geneticist/genetic counselor. Myopathy. Management should be tailored to the individual. A general approach to appropriate management can prolong survival and improve quality of life. This general approach is based on the typical progression and complications of individuals with LGMD as described by McDonald et al [1995] and Bushby [1999]. Weight control to avoid obesity Physical therapy and stretching exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures Occupational therapy and use of mechanical aids such as canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs as needed for ambulation and mobility Surgical intervention as needed for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity and scoliosis Use of respiratory aids when indicated Social and emotional support and stimulation to maximize a sense of social involvement and productivity and to reduce the sense of social isolation common in individuals with these disorders [Eggers & Zatz 1998] Assisted living arrangements as necessitated by muscle weakness and/or dementia Paget disease of bone. Treatment with the following potent bisphosphonates can reduce the alkaline phosphatase concentration and relieve pain and disability: Actonel®/risedronate Fosamax®/alendronate Aredia®/pamidronate

Surveillance

 At periodic intervals: Echocardiogram and EKG to monitor for evidence of cardiomyopathy Pulmonary function studies Alkaline phosphatase, skeletal x-rays, and bone scans for monitoring of the PDB if symptomatic and for monitoring of therapy Monitoring of behavior and mental status

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Individuals and their families should be educated about safety precautions and environmental modification in the home and at work.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.