http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/iiae3

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with susceptibility to infection-induced acute encephalopathy 3 (IIAE3), the following evaluations are recommended after an episode of acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ANE): Brain MRI during a quiescent period. This should demonstrate resolution of the edema signals and may reveal regions of necrosis. This interval baseline will be helpful in distinguishing new versus old lesions in subsequent febrile events. Rehabilitation/OT/PT consultation Neurology consultation Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment has been aimed at reducing the inflammatory state [Okumura et al 2009, Bergamino et al 2012]. During an acute episode of encephalopathy, early administration of corticosteroids has been associated with improved outcomes in patients with sporadic ANE [Okumura et al 2009]. Although this treatment course is also advocated for IIAE3, no specific studies have been performed to support that. Anecdotally, treatment has mirrored that of acute demyelinating encephalomyelopathy (ADEM) with the use of steroids, IVIg, and plasmapheresis. TNFα antagonists have also been used. Because the diagnosis of ANE is usually made days into the encephalopathy, initiation of therapy occurs after the onset of damage. Thus, anecdotally, these interventions have shown varied, but overall limited, therapeutic effects. Repeat episodes of encephalopathy presumably result in cellular damage and, thus, outcomes become progressively worse [Neilson et al 2003], prompting the need for close attention to new febrile events and early intervention as follows: Prior identification of an RANBP2 pathogenic variant in an affected individual allows early recognition of an ANE episode and prompt steroid therapy, which may result in a reduction in disease severity. With behavioral changes during febrile episodes, early evaluation by a neurologist with prompt hospitalization, CNS imaging, and initiation of steroid therapy may provide the best chance to terminate an ANE episode before damage occurs.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Routine vaccinations and yearly influenza vaccinations are recommended, but caution with certain live virus vaccines may need to be observed (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). No evidence exists to suggest that vaccinations cause acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ANE) in an individual heterozygous for an RANBP2 pathogenic variant.

Surveillance

No standard tests allow prediction of the triggering of an ANE event or progression of an event once one occurs. In intervals between ANE events neurologic function is stable. Follow-up evaluations focus on developmental progression and addressing functional deficits related to neurologic damage. In the absence of other risks for seizures, anticonvulsant therapy started during an ANE event can often be discontinued.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid individuals who are ill with an infectious disease and adhere to strict precautions regarding hand washing. Only one episode of ANE following an immunization has been reported: cellular pertussis was given to a child age six months representing a simplex case (i.e., a single occurrence in a family) in whom RANBP2 molecular genetic testing was not performed [Aydin et al 2010]. Because the likely causative component was the cellular pertussis, the acellular DTaP is preferred. In mice, intranasal inoculation of certain influenza subtypes can result in CNS invasion [Shinya et al 2000]. Although this is unlikely with the live attenuated influenza virus, it may be preferable to choose an injectable form instead.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

In a family with IIAE3 in which the disease-associated RANBP2 pathogenic variant has been identified, molecular genetic testing of at-risk first-degree relatives, especially children, is warranted so that those who have inherited the RANBP2 pathogenic variant can benefit from prompt intervention in the early stages of ANE (see Treatment of Manifestations). The ability to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives also reduces unnecessary utilization of resources, such as emergency room visits, for those who have not inherited the RANBP2 pathogenic variant. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.