http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/image

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with IMAGe syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Endocrinologic evaluation* to manage adrenal insufficiency, typically including:

Serum and urine concentration of electrolytes

Serum concentration of glucose and ACTH

Assessment of arterial blood gases

Consultation with an endocrinologist

*Of note, individuals who are in shock often have hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, hypoglycemia, acidosis, markedly elevated serum ACTH, and increased urinary excretion of sodium.

Urogenital evaluation and consultation with a urologist to consider management of undescended testicles and/or genital surgery

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Adrenal insufficiency. Management of adrenal insufficiency in IMAGe syndrome is similar to management of adrenal insufficiency from other causes and should be under the supervision of an endocrinologist.

Episodes of acute adrenal insufficiency require close monitoring of blood pressure, hydration, clinical status, and serum concentration of glucose and electrolytes. Treatment with IV saline, glucose, and cortisol are utilized. If the serum electrolytes do not improve, a mineralocorticoid (fludrocortisone) is added or the dose of cortisol is increased.

Once the acute episode has been managed, replacement doses of glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids and oral supplements of sodium chloride are given. Dosages must be increased with stress, such as intercurrent illness, surgery, or trauma. Steroid doses need to be managed to enable optimal linear growth without risking an adrenal crisis.

The wearing of a Medic Alert® bracelet is strongly recommended.

Growth hormone (GH) therapy. Although information regarding anticipated adult height in IMAGe syndrome is limited, assessment for GH deficiency should be considered, as one child showed poor GH response to glucagon stimulation [Pedreira et al 2004] and other children with normal GH secretion have demonstrated a response in growth with growth hormone therapy [Lienhardt et al 2002, Kato et al 2014].

Genitourinary abnormalities. Routine surgical management of cryptorchidism and hypospadias by a urologist is indicated.

Males with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism are likely to need increasing doses of testosterone to induce puberty. Long-term adrenal steroid replacement and testosterone replacement should be managed by an experienced endocrinologist.

Orthopedic intervention as necessary for skeletal complications, including scoliosis and hip dysplasia, is appropriate.

Occupational, speech, or physical therapy as needed is appropriate, particularly with the hypotonia that often accompanies the syndrome.

Neurologic evaluation is indicated if developmental delay and/or hypotonia are present.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Vigilance is required during illnesses and surgeries to prevent adrenal crisis.

Surveillance



Surveillance includes:

Frequent evaluations by an endocrinologist for management of adrenal insufficiency and growth hormone therapy;

Evaluation by an orthopedist as needed to monitor skeletal complications such as scoliosis, tibial/femoral bowing, or pain associated with the skeletal dysplasia;

Neurologic follow up as needed for evaluation of developmental delay and/or hypotonia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



If prenatal testing for IMAGe syndrome has not been performed, it is appropriate to evaluate newborn sibs of a proband to enable prompt diagnosis and management of adrenal insufficiency.

Molecular genetic testing is indicated if the CDKN1C pathogenic variant in the family is known;

If the CDKN1C pathogenic variant in the family is not known, family members can be screened for serum electrolyte abnormalities, elevated serum ACTH level, and skeletal features of IMAGe syndrome, including short stature and delayed bone age.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Risks to a mother with IMAGe syndrome during pregnancy include potential adrenal insufficiency; risks during delivery include cephalopelvic disproportion.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.