http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ipex

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with IPEX syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Endocrine. Glucose tolerance test, thyroid function tests, and autoantibodies to pancreatic islet antigens and thyroid antigens Hematologic. Complete blood count and differential, Coombs test Immunologic. Serum IgG, IgM, IgA, and IgE concentrations; regulatory T cell numbers Hepatic. Serum AST, ALT, GGT, and total bilirubin Renal. Serum concentration of BUN and creatinine; urinalysis Nutrition assessment. Serum electrolyte levels including calcium, magnesium, and zinc; serum albumin and pre-albumin

Treatment of Manifestations

 Monitor fluid intake to assure adequate intravascular volume. Use of nutritional support, including TPN or elemental or low-carbohydrate-containing formula if necessary, can be beneficial [Sherman et al 2004]. Follow the standard treatment protocols for diabetes mellitus and autoimmune thyroid disease. The most effective treatment for the enteropathy of IPEX syndrome is T cell-directed immune suppression (i.e., cyclosporin A and FK506) either alone or in combination with steroids [Di Rocco & Marta 1996]. Toxicity, tachyphylaxis, and increased susceptibility to infection related to chronic use of these agents reduce their potential for long-term amelioration of symptoms in most individuals. Sirolimus (rapamycin) has been successfully used in patients for whom FK506 was either ineffective or toxic [Bindl et al 2005, Yong et al 2008]. The ability of sirolimus to suppress effector T cell function while allowing Treg cells to continue to develop and function offers some theoretic advantages for its use [Strauss et al 2007]. In persons with autoimmune neutropenia, granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF, filgrastim) may be beneficial. In one person who developed pemphigus nodularis, use of rituximab improved pemphigus and other IPEX syndrome-associated symptoms [McGinness et al 2006]. It has also been effective in controlling autoimmune hemolytic anemia, immune thrombocytopenic purpura, and autoimmune neutropenia in persons with IPEX syndrome [Torgerson, unpublished results]. In persons with severe disease in whom other therapies have failed and symptoms remain severe, cytotoxic drugs or biologic agents that target T cells may be beneficial, as demonstrated by complete remission of symptoms during a bone marrow transplantation conditioning regimen of anti-thymocyte globulin, busulfan, and cyclophosphamide [Baud et al 2001]. Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) offers the only potential cure for IPEX syndrome. Early attempts at BMT using myeloablative conditioning regimens met with only limited success because of transplant-related mortality and other complications related to the underlying disease [Baud et al 2001]. Recent approaches using non-myeloablative conditioning regimens have markedly improved outcomes and survival [Burroughs et al 2007, Lucas et al 2007, Rao et al 2007]. While generally less toxic, these reduced-intensity conditioning regimens still appear to generate long-term, stable engraftment of a regulatory T cell population [Burroughs et al 2010] and, if performed early, can prevent the development of irreversible diabetes mellitus or thyroiditis.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 BMT is currently the only cure for IPEX syndrome; the degree of symptomatic remission may depend on use of BMT prior to irreversible damage to target organs such as pancreatic islet cells and thyroid.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Patients with autoimmune neutropenia or recurrent infections resulting from severe eczema may benefit from prophylactic antibiotic therapy to decrease the risk of severe infectious complications. Aggressive management of dermatitis with topical steroids and anti-inflammatory agents can help to prevent infections from pathogens that enter as a result of the poor barrier function of the skin.

Surveillance

 Appropriate surveillance includes periodic evaluation of complete blood count, thyroid function, glucose tolerance, kidney function (measurement of serum concentration of BUN, creatinine), and liver function (measurement of serum concentration of AST, ALT) for evidence of autoimmune disease.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Immune activation, for example by immunizations or severe infections, has been reported to cause worsening or exacerbation of disease symptoms [Powell et al 1982]. This does not indicate an absolute contraindication for vaccination in IPEX syndrome but does suggest that there may be benefit to giving vaccines individually instead of combining several vaccines on a single day.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Molecular genetic testing of at-risk males in a family with a known pathogenic variant either prenatally or immediately after birth enables early diagnosis and BMT in affected males before significant organ damage occurs. If the pathogenic variant is not known, monitoring at-risk males for early-onset diarrhea, diabetes mellitus, thyroid dysfunction, and autoimmune hematologic manifestations can allow early identification of affected males. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 There is no evidence that initiation of immunosuppressive therapy prior to the onset of symptoms prevents the primary manifestations of IPEX syndrome. Bone marrow transplantation prior to the onset of symptoms can, however. prevent disease.