http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/iso-def

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and/or needs in an indivudal with a diagnosis of isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency (ISOD), the following evaluations are recommended: Complete neurologic assessment by a pediatric neurologist Formal developmental assessment Ophthalmologic evaluation EEG/video EEG to monitor seizures Assessment of feeding and nutrition and appropriate intervention Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

To date, no definitive treatment for ISOD has been identified. Symptomatic management by a multidisciplinary team consisting of specialists in neurology, nutrition, gastroenterology, pulmonary medicine, physiotherapy, and orthopedics is recommended. Management includes the following: Appropriate medications for management of seizures and spasticity Early consideration of gastrostomy tube placement to manage difficulties with swallowing to assure adequate caloric intake and reduce the risk of aspiration. Appropriate management of vomiting, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and aspiration pneumonia Chest physiotherapy to prevent respiratory complications Sleep studies to assess nocturnal hypoventilation and institute appropriate interventions Assessment for scoliosis The following treatment modalities have been tried with minimal success: Dietary. A low-protein diet restricted in cysteine and methionine has been tried in a few individuals with ISOD. Clinical and biochemical improvement were reported in two patients with late-onset ISOD [Del Rizzo et al 2013]. No clinical benefit has been noted in those with classic ISOD. The value of these diets in presymptomatic individuals has yet to be established. Medical. No medical treatment that improves the neurologic outcome or prevents the development of neurologic manifestations in individuals with ISOD has been identified. The following agents have been tried on an experimental basis with minimal clinical effect: Betaine has been used to increase the remethylation of homocysteine back to methionine, which reduces cysteine and leads to reduction in sulfite levels. Thiamine replacement has been attempted (given that the accumulation of sulfite leads to depletion of thiamine). Use of cysteamine and penicillamine (chelating agents used to chelate sulfite) resulted in no beneficial clinical effects.

Surveillance

Periodic assessment by the multidisciplinary team with particular attention to the following: Nutritional status Neurologic status including evaluation of dosages of antiepileptic drugs and their side effects Degree of spasticity and related complications, including scoliosis Periodic sleep studies

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There many not be clinical trials for this disorder.