http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/jh

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with juvenile hemochromatosis, the following evaluations are recommended: Serum iron status. Measurements of serum iron concentration, total iron binding capacity, transferrin saturation, and serum ferritin concentration Pituitary-gonadal axis. Recording of signs and symptoms of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and measurement of serum concentration of gonadotropins (i.e., FSH, LH) (pituitary gland) and testosterone (testes) or estradiol (ovaries). In several clinical situations, a dynamic evaluation of the pituitary-gonadal axis is required, consisting mainly of a GnRH (gonadotropic releasing hormone) stimulation test. Pituitary MRI may be considered in some cases. Affected joints. Radiographic evaluation Bone mineral density. Dual photon absorptiometry of the lumbar spine Cardiac manifestations. ECG, transthoracic echocardiogram. In individuals without overt clinical manifestations of cardiac failure or arrhythmias, findings suggestive of left ventricular diastolic dysfunction (reduced left ventricular compliance) often precede evidence of ventricular dilatation and compromised ejection fraction. Liver function. Liver histology to determine the extent of liver damage. Documentation of the presence or absence of cirrhosis is of prognostic significance. Current recommendations for HFE-associated classic hereditary hemochromatosis are that HFE p.Cys282Tyr homozygotes with serum ferritin concentration lower than 1000 ng/mL and/or normal liver function enzymes need not be biopsied. Liver biopsy should be considered for individuals with higher serum ferritin concentrations and/or raised liver function enzymes in order to establish prognosis [Morrison et al 2003]. Because of the rarity of juvenile hemochromatosis, a specific protocol for individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis is not available, but adaptation of the classic HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis recommendation is a reasonable approach. Diabetes mellitus. Screening for diabetes mellitus by overnight fasting plasma glucose measurement and, when indicated, by oral glucose tolerance test.

Treatment of Manifestations

Management and treatment recommendations for juvenile hemochromatosis stated here are based on the established HFE-associated hemochromatosis recommendations when specific juvenile hemochromatosis information may not exist. Treatment of iron overload. Phlebotomy is the therapy of choice in juvenile hemochromatosis and follows the same principles as the treatment of classic HFE-associated hemochromatosis. It is simple, safe, and effective. Affected individuals should be encouraged to follow a regimen of phlebotomy of one unit of blood once or twice weekly [Tavill 2001]. Approximately 200 mg of iron are removed per unit of blood depending on the individual's hematocrit. Because individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis are usually severely iron overloaded, a therapeutic regimen of one to two weekly phlebotomies may take up to two to three years to reduce iron stores to desired levels. The hematocrit should be monitored prior to phlebotomy; phlebotomy should be postponed if the hematocrit drops more than 20% of its initial value [Tavill 2001]. Systematic administration of erythropoietin has been successful in maintaining the hematocrit in individuals who failed to mount an adequate bone marrow response to the phlebotomy regimen [De Gobbi et al 2000]. Serum ferritin concentration reflects body iron stores and is used to monitor the progress of therapy; it is expected to fall progressively, along with iron mobilization. Measuring serum ferritin concentration every 10-12 phlebotomies is reasonable; however, once serum ferritin concentration is below 100 ng/mL, it should be measured more often, ideally prior to each phlebotomy. Achievement of serum ferritin concentration below 50 ng/mL and restoration of normal transferrin-iron saturation indicates the end point of the intensive phlebotomy treatment. Maintenance therapy. The frequency of phlebotomies is adjusted to maintain normal serum ferritin concentration and transferrin-iron saturation. When iron removal is not urgent, phlebotomies could be spaced further apart according to the responsiveness of the bone marrow to restore adequate hematocrit. Usually four to six phlebotomies annually are sufficient. The individual should permanently continue on this schedule of phlebotomy maintenance therapy. Iron chelators such as parenteral deferoxamine (Desferal®) are used to treat individuals with secondary iron overload. They are not recommended in the treatment of juvenile hemochromatosis unless the disease is complicated by concomitant anemia or severe cardiac failure. In the latter situation, administration of deferoxamine alone or in combination with deferiprone can reduce mortality by improving left ventricular ejection fraction [Kelly et al 1998, Fabio et al 2007]. Treatment of secondary complications. Treatment does not essentially differ from the conventional treatment applied in other situations: Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is generally considered irreversible, despite adequate iron removal. However, reversal of hypogonadism has been observed in some young individuals who have been successfully treated with phlebotomy or iron chelation [Angelopoulos et al 2005]. For the majority of individuals with hypogonadism, testosterone or hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is required to improve symptoms and prevent the development of secondary osteopenia or osteoporosis [Angelopoulos et al 2006]. Transdermal preparations (i.e., patches) deliver testosterone or estradiol at a controlled rate into the systemic circulation, avoiding first-pass hepatic metabolism; therefore, this approach may be useful for individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis, eliminating the risk of potential liver complications. Administration of gonadotropins has restored fertility and has led to a twin pregnancy in a woman with juvenile hemochromatosis. Arthropathy is not modified by treatment. Individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis have to cope with persistent arthralgia presenting at a young age. Painful joints may require treatment with salicylates or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) [Vaiopoulos et al 2003]. Severe cardiac failure is treated with ACE inhibitors, diuretics, cardiac glycosides, and possibly deferoxamine. If left untreated, cardiac disease progresses rapidly and becomes refractory to treatment, leading to death in most cases. Orthotopic heart transplantation has been used on occasion [Caines et al 2005]. Liver steatosis and fibrosis are treated with appropriately early phlebotomy [Camaschella et al 2002]; however, it is uncertain whether these features are reversible. Reversibility of liver fibrosis has been reported in individuals treated for HFE-associated hemochromatosis [Falize et al 2006]. Cirrhosis is thought to be irreversible despite iron removal. Individuals with cirrhosis should undergo endoscopic evaluation to document the presence of varices and should be treated with propranolol or nadolol, as indicated. In advanced disease, orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) could be considered. Of note, individuals with hereditary hemochromatosis undergoing OLT display an overall lower survival than individuals undergoing OLTs for other causes of liver disease. Because most post-transplantation deaths occur in the perioperative period from cardiac disease or infection, it is advisable to remove as much of excess iron stores as possible before OLT even though the effect of excess tissue iron on survival post-OLT is not known [Tavill 2001]. Diabetes mellitus may require insulin administration; successful iron removal may improve its course [Angelopoulos et al 2007].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Individuals with biochemical evidence of iron overload but without evidence of organ dysfunction or failure should be encouraged to undergo regular phlebotomies until excess iron stores are depleted to prevent the development of complications associated with excess iron stores. Treatment by phlebotomy in presymptomatic stages can prevent organ damage.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

HRT prevents the development of osteoporosis.

Surveillance

Whenever hepatic cirrhosis is identified, monitoring for hepatocellular cancer is recommended. Most hepatologists propose twice-yearly screening with abdominal ultrasound examination and serum alpha-fetoprotein concentration [Tavill 2001].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following: Alcohol consumption, which has a synergistic effect with iron-induced liver damage in individuals with liver damage Iron-containing preparations and supplemental vitamin C Handling or eating uncooked shellfish or marine fish, because of susceptibility to fatal septicemia from the marine bacterium V vulnificus

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Once a diagnosis of JHH has been made in a family, all at-risk family members (i.e., sibs) should be tested for the pathogenic variants identified in the affected individual. Family members with two HJV or HAMP pathogenic variants should be followed from early childhood with annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration and transferrin iron saturation to monitor for the development of iron overload. If a molecular diagnosis was not made or the genetic status of the sibs of an affected individual is unknown, the sibs should be followed from early childhood with annual measurement of serum ferritin concentration and transferrin iron saturation to monitor for the development of iron overload. If juvenile hemochromatosis is detected before evidence of organ damage, either by molecular genetic testing in relatives at-risk or by biochemical testing (i.e., serum ferritin concentration and transferrin-iron saturation), treatment via phlebotomy can reverse or prevent many of the secondary complications resulting from organ damage. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

All pregnant women with JHH should be under the care of a maternal-fetal medicine specialist, an endocrinologist, and a cardiologist. Preferably women with JHH should be seen by these specialists prior to becoming pregnant. Pregnancy in women with untreated JHH is high risk because the increased hemodynamic burden of pregnancy can precipitate cardiac failure in women with an underlying cardiomyopathy. Of note, it is critically important for specialists in endocrinology and infertility to be aware of JHH as a cause of infertility and to evaluate patients for iron overload prior to correcting the underlying hormonal imbalance. In a case report, a young woman who became pregnant following correction of her hypogonadotropic hypogonadism developed fatal cardiogenic shock; she was only identified as having JHH with severe iron overload at the time of presentation of her heart disease [Filali et al 2004].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.