http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/jln

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS), the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed: Formal audiology evaluation for extent of hearing loss Cardiac examination including calculation of QTc A three-generation family history that focuses on cardiac disease, syncope, and hearing ability Complete blood count to screen for anemia. If anemia is present, screening for iron deficiency is recommended. Consultation with a clinical geneticist

Treatment of Manifestations

 Hearing loss in JLNS may be treated successfully with cochlear implantation, an intervention that does not interfere with bipolar pacemakers [Green et al 2000, Chorbachi et al 2002] (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). To date, the cumulative published experience includes approximately 20 individuals with JLNS who have received cochlear implantation. Of note, the diagnosis of JLNS was only verified with molecular genetic testing in four Norwegian individuals, all of whom had pathogenic variants in KCNQ1. An increase in sound-related syncopal episodes was noted after cochlear implantation in one child [Al-Aama et al 2015]. Note: Although cochlear implantation appears to be safe, special precautions are necessary during anesthesia because of the increased risk for cardiac arrhythmia [Daneshi et al 2008, Siem et al 2008, Yanmei et al 2008]. One affected individual died during a perioperative cardiac arrest [Broomfield et al 2010]. Cardiac issues. The main goal in management of JLNS is prevention of syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death. Note that efficacy of beta-blocker treatment is only partial: 51% of treated individuals had cardiac events and 27% had cardiac arrest or sudden death. Even with additional therapies (e.g., pacemaker, implantable cardioverter/defibrillator, left sympathetic denervation), 18 (56%) of 32 individuals experienced additional symptoms, including sudden death in seven [Schwartz et al 2006]. Administration of beta-adrenergic blockers has been the traditional first-line medical therapy for cardiac events, but more aggressive, immediate treatment may be appropriate. Cardiac events in JLNS frequently occur despite beta blockade [Schwartz et al 2006]. Goldenberg et al [2006] demonstrated markedly increased mortality in individuals with JLNS treated exclusively with beta blockers in comparison to individuals with Romano-Ward syndrome. A mortality rate of 35% over five years was observed for individuals receiving beta blockers exclusively; 86% of individuals treated exclusively with beta blockers experienced a cardiac event. The interactions of beta blockers with other medical conditions (e.g., asthma, diabetes mellitus, depression) should also be considered. Propranolol and nadolol have been shown to be more effective than metoprolol in suppressing cardiac events [Chockalingam et al 2012, Winbo et al 2014]. A recent consensus statement advocates use of nadolol as the preferred beta blocker for drug therapy of individuals with long QT syndrome [Ackerman et al 2017]. Implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) should be considered in individuals with a history of cardiac arrest or failure to respond to other treatments [Goel et al 2004]. More recent recommendations have strongly urged ICD placement for high-risk individuals, defined by the following criteria [Schwartz et al 2006]: QTc interval >550 msec Syncope before age five years Male gender, age >20 years with KCNQ1 pathogenic variant The risk for sudden cardiac death appears to be low in individuals younger than age five years, but medical therapy should be administered early in these high-risk individuals and ICD placement considered after age five years [Richter & Brugada 2006]. In certain cases, the availability of automated external defibrillators in the home, workplace, or school may be applicable, as is appropriate CPR training of family members and those who have regular contact with individuals with JLNS. Left cardiac sympathetic denervation has been effective for some individuals. Iron deficiency anemia. The treatment of iron deficiency anemia should follow standard guidelines.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 See Treatment of Manifestations regarding prevention of syncope, cardiac arrest, and sudden death.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Special precautions during anesthesia are necessary because of the increased risk for cardiac arrhythmia [Daneshi et al 2008, Siem et al 2008, Yanmei et al 2008].

Surveillance

 Beta-blocker dose should be regularly assessed for efficacy and adverse effects, and doses altered as needed. Because dose adjustment is especially important in growing children, evaluation is appropriate every three to six months during rapid growth phases. Regular, periodic evaluation of implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) for inappropriate shocks and pocket or lead complications is indicated.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 The following should be avoided: Drugs that cause further prolongation of the QT interval or provoke torsade de pointes; see www.crediblemeds.org for a complete and updated list (registration required). Triggers for intense or sudden emotion; activities that are known to precipitate syncopal events in individuals with long QT syndrome, including: Competitive sports Amusement park rides Frightening movies Jumping into cold water A cardiologist should make recommendations for activity restrictions based on the effectiveness of medical intervention.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate sibs and parents of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk family members. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, ECG testing should be undertaken to evaluate for QT prolongation. Standard newborn screening programs are sufficient to identify hearing loss in children with JLNS. Because of the relationship between JLNS and long QT syndrome, ECG should be considered for relatives at risk for JLNS even if they have normal hearing. If the JLNS-causing pathogenic variants in an affected family member are known, molecular genetic testing of a relative with congenital profound sensorineural hearing loss is recommended to confirm the diagnosis of JLNS. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Consideration should be given as to whether a mother who has a fetus affected with JLNS herself has long QT syndrome [Seth et al 2007].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Family members of individuals with JLNS should be trained in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) as up to 95% of individuals with JLNS have a cardiac event before adulthood [Schwartz et al 2006]. Affected individuals should wear an ID bracelet explaining their diagnosis. It is appropriate to notify local emergency medical services (EMS) of high-risk persons, including those with JLNS [Hazinski et al 2004].