

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Joubert syndrome (JS), the following baseline evaluations to identify the extent of disease in affected infants/children are recommended [Parisi et al 2007] (full text). Recommendations were developed by a consensus panel and are outlined on the Joubert Syndrome and Related Disorders Foundation web site. Examination of high-quality MRI scan to assess for cerebral malformations, neuronal migration disorders, or cephaloceles that could portend a poorer prognosis or seizures, if not done at the time of diagnosis A baseline neurologic evaluation with particular attention to tone, respiratory pattern (tachypnea and apnea), eye movements, development, and cerebellar function Sleep history with polysomnogram as baseline evaluation and particularly if symptomatic apnea is present Assessment of oromotor function by a speech therapist and/or by fluoroscopic swallowing studies Developmental assessment with age-appropriate tools Evaluation by a pediatric ophthalmologist via dilated eye examination for colobomas and retinal changes, as well as strabismus and ptosis, with consideration of specialized testing such as visual-evoked potentials, electroretinogram, and ocular motility testing Abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate for hepatic fibrosis or renal cysts and/or findings consistent with nephronophthisis (e.g., loss of corticomedullary differentiation) Tests of renal function, including blood pressure, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), serum creatinine concentration, complete blood count (CBC), and urinalysis from first-morning void for specific gravity to test concentrating ability (if feasible) Liver function tests including serum concentrations of transaminases, albumin, bilirubin, and prothrombin time For males with micropenis or any child with signs of growth hormone deficiency, endocrine evaluation for other pituitary abnormalities Skeletal survey and/or limb radiographs if there is suspicion of a skeletal dysplasia such as short-rib polydactyly or JATD Consultation with a clinical geneticist to document family history, to evaluate growth and head size, and to evaluate for other anomalies including polydactyly, dysmorphic facial features, tongue tumors/lobulations, and micropenis

Treatment of Manifestations

 
            Respiratory Infants and children with abnormal breathing patterns should be considered for apnea monitoring if the abnormality is severe. Supportive therapy may include stimulatory medications such as caffeine or supplementary oxygen, particularly in the newborn period. Anesthetic management during surgical procedures for infants with significant respiratory disturbance may be accomplished in some cases by the use of: Regional anesthesia without opioids to avoid exacerbation of apneic episodes [Vodopich & Gordon 2004]; Alpha-2 agonists such as clonidine or dexmedetomidine to avoid respiratory depression and other complications of opioids while achieving motion-free images [Sriganesh et al 2014]. In rare cases, mechanical support and/or tracheostomy may be considered in a child with severe respiratory dysfunction. Aggressive treatment of middle ear infections is indicated to avoid conductive hearing loss. 
            Hypotonia and therapeutic interventions Appropriate management and therapy of oromotor dysfunction by a speech therapist Nasogastric feeding tubes or gastrostomy tube placement for feeding in children with severe dysphagia Occupational, physical, and speech therapy through early intervention programs Individualized educational assessment and support for school-aged children to maximize school performance Periodic neuropsychologic and developmental testing at appropriate ages 
            Other CNS malformations Neurosurgical consultation is indicated for those with evidence of hydrocephalus (rapidly increasing head circumference and/or bulging fontanel). Note: When hydrocephalus occurs in JS, it rarely requires shunting. Posterior fossa cysts and fluid collections rarely require intervention. Encephalocele may require primary surgical closure. Seizures should be evaluated and treated by a neurologist using standard antiepileptic drugs. A variety of psychotropic medications have been used to treat the behavioral complications in Joubert syndrome; no single medication has been uniformly effective for all children. 
            Ophthalmologic Surgery as needed for symptomatic ptosis, strabismus, or amblyopia Corrective lenses for refractive errors Possible vision therapies for oculomotor apraxia, although specific studies are lacking in this disorder Interventions for the visually impaired when congenital blindness or progressive retinal dystrophy are present 
            Renal disease Consultation with a nephrologist is indicated. End-stage renal disease (ESRD) resulting from nephronophthisis frequently requires dialysis and/or kidney transplantation during the teenage years or later. Hypertension, anemia, and other complications of ESRD require specific treatment. 
            Hepatic fibrosis Consultation with a gastroenterologist is indicated. Liver failure and/or fibrosis should be managed by a gastroenterologist with arrangements for surgical intervention such as portal shunting for esophageal varices and portal hypertension, as appropriate. Some individuals have needed orthotopic liver transplantation. 
            Skeletal Surgical treatment for polydactyly Appropriate medical management by an orthopedic specialist for scoliosis 
            Other Orofacial clefting is treated by standard surgical interventions. Tongue tumors that impair normal swallowing or cause respiratory obstruction may require surgical resection. Symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea and/or tongue hypertrophy in older individuals may require evaluation with a polysomnogram and/or by an otolaryngologist for consideration of adenoidectomy, tonsillectomy, or surgical tongue reduction. Some children have used BiPAP or C-PAP at night. Consultation with an endocrinologist for menstrual irregularities and for pituitary hormone deficiency (with hormone replacement as indicated) is appropriate. Obesity should be managed with appropriate measures, including diet, exercise, and behavioral therapies Congenital heart defects and situs abnormalities should be treated by conventional therapies. Surgical correction of Hirschsprung disease (if present) is indicated.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Antibiotic prophylaxis for surgical and dental procedures is indicated for individuals with structural cardiac anomalies.

Surveillance

 Because no uniformly reliable distinguishing characteristics allow prediction of the complications that may develop in an infant or young child with Joubert syndrome, a number of annual evaluations are recommended (see also Joubert Syndrome and Related Disorders Foundation web site): Pediatric and neurologic evaluation and monitoring of growth, sexual maturation, breathing (including apnea symptoms), and motor function Neuropsychological and developmental evaluation and testing, as appropriate Ophthalmologic evaluation for visual acuity, tracking ability, and development of retinal dystrophy Abdominal ultrasound examination for evaluation of possible liver and kidney abnormalities Liver function tests Evaluation of renal function: measurement of blood pressure, serum concentrations of BUN and creatinine, CBC, and assessment of first-morning void urinalysis

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Individuals with renal impairment should avoid nephrotoxic medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Individuals with liver impairment should avoid hepatotoxic medications.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Sibs or relatives who have clinical features similar to those of an individual with JS warrant genetic consultation. If the pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in a proband, testing symptomatic relatives for these pathogenic variants is appropriate. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.