

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with parkin type of early-onset Parkinson disease, the following evaluations are recommended: Assess the presence and the severity of parkinsonian signs, non-motor features and treatment-related complications using the Unified Parkinson’s disease rating scale (UPDRS) [Fahn & Elton 1987] or the Movement Disorder Society (MDS) UPDRS [Goetz et al 2008]. Assess the presence of atypical signs, such as hyperreflexia and dystonia. Evaluate the degree of response to treatment. Assess for cognitive or behavioral problems. Consider clinical genetics consultation.

Treatment of Manifestations

 To date, the treatment of parkin type of early-onset Parkinson disease is not different from that of idiopathic Parkinson disease. No specific guidelines are currently available. The motor impairment usually responds very well to low doses of dopaminergic medication and is typically sustained even after long disease duration. The most relevant treatment-related problem is the early occurrence of levodopa-induced dyskinesias (abnormal involuntary movements) and motor fluctuations. The management of treatment-related complications is not different from the strategies applied in idiopathic Parkinson disease and includes deep brain stimulation in selected cases [Moro et al 2008].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 To reduce or delay side effects, levodopa doses should not exceed the levels required for satisfactory clinical response.

Surveillance

 Neurologic follow-up every six to 12 months to modify treatment as needed is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Neuroleptic treatment may exacerbate parkinsonism.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnancy in women with Parkinson disease is a rare event. Only one case of a successful pregnancy in a woman with parkin type of early-onset Parkinson disease has been reported [Serikawa et al 2011]. The 27-year old woman successfully gave birth to spontaneously conceived dichorionic/diamnionic male twins. Exacerbation of her motor disabilities was noted during late pregnancy. She was treated with levodopa/carbidopa only during the period of organogenesis. Both babies were born healthy, without any evidence of psychomotor impairment two years after birth. Worsening of parkinsonian symptoms could in part be explained by the reduction of dopaminergic replacement therapy. If possible, dopaminergic medication should be limited to levodopa/decarboxylase inhibitor to minimize the potential risk for teratogenicity at least over the course of the embryonic phase.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.