

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS), the following evaluations are recommended if not already completed: History for abdominal pain, rectal bleeding, constipation, diarrhea, or change in stool size, shape, and/or color Complete blood count (CBC), colonoscopy, and upper endoscopy in the mid-teens (age 15 years) or at the time of initial symptoms, whichever is earlier Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor All individuals with an SMAD4 pathogenic variant should be evaluated for complications related to hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT)

Treatment of Manifestations

 JPS. The most effective management is routine colonoscopy with endoscopic polypectomy. Early endoscopic polypectomy may reduce morbidity by reducing the risk for cancer, bleeding, or intestinal obstruction. In some individuals, removal of all or part of the colon or stomach may be necessary to alleviate symptoms and/or reduce cancer risk when a large number of polyps are present. The preferred procedure is debated: some experts prefer subtotal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis, whereas others prefer proctocolectomy with an ileoanal pouch. The number of colonic or rectal polyps does not appear to correlate with the need for proctectomy [Oncel et al 2005]. JPS/HHT. Treat manifestations of HHT as needed; see Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Increased awareness, education, and screening have helped successive generations benefit from early detection of JPS and cancer prevention/risk reduction.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 When present, anemia may be improved by polypectomy or surgery.

Surveillance

 For individuals with JPS who have undergone surgical resection of bowel, endoscopic follow up is required regardless of the surgical procedure because of the high rate of subsequent development of polyps in the rectum and the pouch [Oncel et al 2005]. For individuals with an SMAD4 or BMPR1A pathogenic variant identified by molecular genetic testing, individuals with a clinical diagnosis of JPS, or individuals with a family history of JPS who have not undergone molecular genetic testing or whose molecular genetic test results were uninformative [Howe et al 1998a] (see NCCN guidelines): Monitor for rectal bleeding and/or anemia, abdominal pain, constipation, diarrhea, or change in stool size, shape, and/or color. These symptoms may warrant additional screening. CBC, colonoscopy, and upper endoscopy screening should begin in the mid-teens (age 15 years) or at the time of initial symptoms, whichever is earlier. If negative, screening should be repeated in three years. If only one or a few polyps are identified, the polyps should be removed. Subsequently, screening should be done annually until no additional polyps are found, at which time screening every three years may resume. If many polyps are identified, removal of most of the colon or stomach may be necessary. Subsequently, screening should be done annually until no additional polyps are found, at which time screening every three years may resume. In families in which findings suggest JPS/HHT syndrome or families with a known SMAD4 pathogenic variant, predictive molecular genetic testing may be appropriate before age 15 years because surveillance for potential complications of HHT begins in early childhood [Gallione et al 2004]. Until the frequency and spectrum of HHT complications in JPS/HHT syndrome are known, it may be appropriate to follow the HHT surveillance guidelines for individuals with JPS/HHT syndrome or a known SMAD4 pathogenic variant. Precautionary screening for individuals at risk for JPS who do not have the family-specific pathogenic variant was previously recommended [Howe et al 1998a]; however, this screening is unnecessary if molecular genetic testing was performed in a CLIA-approved laboratory. Family members who do not have the family-specific pathogenic variant can be screened for colon cancer as recommended for the normal U.S. population. For surveillance recommendations for individuals with HHT, see Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures. In families in which findings suggest JPS or families with a known BMPR1A pathogenic variant, evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing in the first to second decade of life if the pathogenic variant in the family is known; If the familial pathogenic variant is not known, CBC and lower intestinal endoscopy in individuals age 15 years an older. Normal results do not rule out a diagnosis of JPS (see Surveillance for additional recommendations). In families in which findings suggest JPS/HHT syndrome or families with a known SMAD4 pathogenic variant: Molecular genetic testing before age 15 years for children at risk for an SMAD4 pathogenic variant should be offered because the surveillance for HHT-related findings begins earlier in childhood than the surveillance for polyps. In families in which findings suggest JPS/HHT syndrome but the familial pathogenic variant is not known: CBC and lower intestinal endoscopy in individuals age 15 years an older. Normal results do not rule out a diagnosis of JPS (see Surveillance for additional recommendations). Individuals older than age 40 years, targeted medical history and clinical examination for features of HHT. The absence of mild but recurrent epistaxis and subtle telangiectases in characteristic locations on careful examination is reassuring (see Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia). In individuals age 40 years and younger, targeted medical history and clinical examination for features of HHT as well as initial evaluation for brain and pulmonary AVMs, as features of HHT may not be identified by medical history and clinical examination in younger individuals. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 See Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia, Pregnancy Management

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 No known chemoprevention options are effective for juvenile polyps.