

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and the needs of an individual diagnosed with Kabuki syndrome (KS), the following evaluations are recommended: Height, weight, and head circumference are measured and plotted on standard growth charts. Evaluation for a hormone deficiency, including hypothyroidism or growth hormone deficiency, is recommended in children with abnormal growth velocity. If feeding problems are severe and/or failure to thrive is apparent, an esophageal pH probe study can be considered. A barium swallow study may assist in determining whether the suck and swallow mechanism is normal. Evaluation for developmental milestones is recommended and referral for formal developmental evaluation is indicated if delays are identified. A physical therapy evaluation is indicated in those children with KS who exhibit hypotonia. Evaluation by a neurologist is recommended in those individuals with suspected seizure activity. Brain imaging at the time of diagnosis (if not already performed) is recommended in those with headaches, ocular disturbances, otoneurologic disturbances, lower cranial nerve signs, cerebellar ataxia, spasticity, or seizures to evaluate for a Chiari 1 malformation or for a brain malformation. As the incidence of cardiac malformations is high, echocardiogram with good visualization of the aortic arch is indicated in all individuals at the time of diagnosis. Referral to a pediatric cardiologist for management should be considered if a cardiac defect is present. Because of the frequency of ocular findings, formal ophthalmologic examination at the time of diagnosis is recommended for all individuals with KS. A directed evaluation of the palate at the time of diagnosis is indicated. Individuals with cleft lip, cleft palate, submucous cleft palate, or any evidence of velopharyngeal insufficiency should be referred for otorhinolaryngology evaluation. A directed physical examination to evaluate for evidence of gastrointestinal abnormalities is indicated in neonates with KS. Evidence of cholestasis should prompt a full workup, as it would in any other child. By recognizing that eventration of the diaphragm is seen in this condition, the medical care provider can avoid further evaluation for possible phrenic nerve paralysis. Because of the frequency of renal/urinary tract anomalies, renal ultrasound examination is indicated in all individuals with KS at the time of diagnosis. Referral to a nephrologist and/or urologist is recommended for those individuals with hydronephrosis. Referral to a urologist is indicated in those individuals with cryptorchidism. Referral for evaluation by an orthopedic surgeon in those children with congenital dislocation of the hip(s) and other joints is recommended. Spine radiographs at the time of diagnosis are indicated in all individuals with KS. If scoliosis is noted and/or vertebral abnormalities are detected, orthopedic evaluation should be considered. Obtaining T cell count, T cell subsets, and serum immunoglobulin levels in all individuals with KS at the time of diagnosis or at one year of age (whichever comes second) is recommended. An evaluation by an immunologist is indicated if the levels are abnormal or if the affected individual has a history of recurrent infections. Clinical genetics consultation is appropriate. Comprehensive management guidelines are also available online (pdf).

Treatment of Manifestations

 Thickened feedings and appropriate positioning after meals may improve reflux symptoms. Gastrostomy tube placement is typically considered in those with severe feeding difficulties, especially if a poorly coordinated suck and swallow are noted. Thorough psychoeducational testing is indicated for all children who exhibit cognitive difficulties in order to determine strengths and weaknesses and to tailor special education services. Special education services are tailored to address strengths and weaknesses for each child with KS since no characteristic pattern of disabilities has been identified. Formal evaluation by a developmental pediatrician or psychiatrist may be helpful in those children who exhibit features suggestive of autism spectrum disorders, since educational interventions may be influenced by the result. Standard antiepileptic treatment is efficacious in treating seizures in individuals with KS. Evidence of sensorineural hearing loss is typically followed up with referral to an otorhinolaryngologist and imaging to screen for inner ear anomalies. Persistent, unexplained head and neck pain or other evidence of intracranial abnormality could be secondary to Chiari I malformation and is a clear indication for brain imaging in affected individuals. Monitoring for nocturnal lagophthalmos by parents or caregivers is recommended. If present, evaluation by an ophthalmologist is indicated. A dental evaluation as a toddler is indicated in every child with KS. Referral for orthodontic assessment should be arranged if abnormalities such as hypodontia or significant malocclusion are noted at any point in childhood. Individuals with documented immunoglobulin deficiency may benefit from scheduled intravenous immunoglobulin infusions. Treatment of premature thelarche is not warranted unless other signs of premature puberty are apparent. At least one individual has shown no change in linear rate of growth when treated with human growth hormone [Kawame et al 1999].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 As with many cases of congenital heart disease, prophylactic antibiotic treatment may be indicated prior to and during any procedure (e.g., dental work) that could lead to bacteremia.

Surveillance

 The following are recommended for individuals with KS: Frequent monitoring of height, weight, and head circumference (at each well-child visit and, at a minimum, yearly) Evaluation of developmental milestones at each well child visit; referral for formal developmental evaluation if delays are identified Following prepubertal girls expectantly for possible premature thelarche, so that the healthcare provider can reassure parents if this finding becomes apparent Annual monitoring of vision Annual hearing evaluation Expectant monitoring for otitis media in children. An ear examination is indicated at all well-child visits; prompt evaluation for all children with symptoms suggestive of otitis media. Regular follow up by an immunologist for those with abnormal immunologic studies or those who have recurrent infections

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.