http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/kcnk9-is

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with KCNK9 imprinting syndrome, the recommended evaluations following diagnosis (if not performed as part of the evaluation that led to diagnosis) are summarized in Table 3. Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis of KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome

Treatment of Manifestations

 No specific management guidelines have been developed. Management is mostly supportive. A multidisciplinary team of specialists in clinical genetics, plastic surgery, ophthalmology, pulmonology, gastroenterology, feeding, endocrinology, and neurology is recommended depending on the affected individual’s manifestations. Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome

Surveillance

 Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 KCNK9, which is imprinted and expressed from the maternal allele with paternal silencing, encodes a member of the two pore-domain potassium channel (K2p9.1 or TASK3). The only KCNK9 pathogenic variant reported to date, p.Gly236Arg, reduces the outward current of the TASK3 channel by approximately 80% [Veale et al 2014]. Three members of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory fenamic acid class of drugs – flufenamic acid (FFA), niflumic acid (NFA) and mefanamic acid (MFA) – have been shown to stimulate two pore-domain potassium channels [Takahira et al 2005]. The reduced outward current through abnormal p.Arg236-containing TASK3 channels has been shown to be partially rescued by FFA, suggesting that fenamic acid compounds could be useful in treating this condition [Veale et al 2014]. Two affected individuals to date have been treated with oral MFA starting at age 14 months, with noted increased energy while on the medication and no adverse reactions. Clinical features are still present, and long-term studies are necessary to predict the outcome of individuals treated with MFA [Graham et al 2016]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.