http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/kennedy

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA), the following are recommended: Assessment of/for: Neurologic findings; attention to distal muscle strength and deep tendon reflexes Speech Swallowing Androgen responsiveness: male pattern hair growth, testicular size, and fertility Gynecomastia Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Physical therapy and rehabilitation approaches, including the use of braces and walkers, offer the best prospect for remaining ambulatory as the disease progresses. Some individuals with SBMA have breast reduction surgery for gynecomastia [Sperfeld et al 2002].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 There are currently no effective treatments to prevent development of disease manifestations in an asymptomatic individual known to possess an expanded CAG repeat after presymptomatic diagnosis.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 The most worrisome complications in SBMA result from bulbar weakness, as these complications (asphyxiation and aspiration pneumonia) can be life threatening. Individuals with bulbar weakness must be counseled in the importance of carefully cutting their food into small pieces for eating and avoiding items that may be difficult to chew and then swallow.

Surveillance

 Appropriate measures include: Strength testing (annually) Pulmonary function tests (annually in advanced cases)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Individuals with a tendency to fall should avoid slippery or rough walking surfaces.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 High-dose testosterone. At least one clinical trial of high-dose oral testosterone has been undertaken; no significant benefit was derived for the androgen treatment group [Goldenberg & Bradley 1996]. Based on research in Drosophila and mouse models of SBMA, many investigators believe that androgen treatment can be harmful. Anti-androgen therapy. There is no consensus or clear evidence as to whether anti-androgen therapy is an effective form of treatment for the neurologic complications. Anti-androgen therapy shows promise based on studies in Drosophila and mouse models as well as knowledge of the molecular basis of SBMA. For these reasons, a Japanese group [Banno et al 2009] performed a clinical trial of leuprorelin in individuals with SBMA who were followed over 48 weeks: significant improvement was observed in cricopharyngeal opening duration, but in no other outcome measures. In particular, there was no effect on the primary outcome measure (the ALS Functional Rating Scale or ALSFRS) in the period of randomization. Although the trial was continued as an open label extension, and encouraging results were reported, the conclusion was that this clinical trial did not establish efficacy for anti-androgen therapy in SBMA [Fischbeck & Bryan 2009]. A larger subsequent study with swallow function as the primary outcome measure also did not show an overall benefit, except in post hoc analysis of subjects in whom disease duration was less than ten years [Katsuno et al 2010]. Another anti-androgen therapy approach was attempted [Fernández-Rhodes et al 2011]: individuals with SBMA were randomized to placebo or dutasteride, a drug that blocks the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone (DHT). The rationale was that DHT may mediate many of the toxic effects, and this drug would permit affected individuals to retain the anabolic effects of testosterone, thereby diminishing the side effects of anti-androgen therapy. However, this study did not show a significant effect of dutasteride on the progression of muscle weakness in SBMA. Hence, the utility of anti-androgen therapy as a treatment for SBMA remains unclear. Furthermore, it is possible that anti-androgen therapies, even if effective, would need to be administered prior to disease onset or early on in the neurodegenerative process. More importantly, the side effects of anti-androgen therapies would probably far outweigh the therapeutic benefit for most individuals, and likely should be reserved for people with SBMA who are wheelchair bound or exhibit pronounced bulbar weakness. Creatine supplementation. Studies of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) suggest that creatine supplementation may temporarily enhance muscle strength and exercise performance in this motor neuron disease [Mazzini et al 2001], prompting speculation that it may offer a similar benefit to individuals with SBMA; this remains to be tested. 
            Experimental therapies in animal models Other interventions that have been shown to have benefit in mouse models of SBMA include the HSP-90 inhibitors 17-AAG and 17-DMAG, the synthetic curcumin derivative ASC-J9, and insulin-like growth factor 1 (reviewed in Fischbeck [2012]). More recently, one group directly examined the role of muscle expression of mutated AR in SBMA disease pathogenesis by developing a BAC transgenic mouse model featuring a floxed first exon to permit cell-type specific excision of a human AR transgene [Cortes et al 2014]. They engineered the human AR transgene to carry 121 CAG repeats (BAC fxAR121), and found that BAC fxAR121 mice develop a gender-restricted, progressive neuromuscular phenotype, characterized by weight loss, motor deficits, muscle atrophy, myopathy, and shortened life span. By terminating expression of mutated AR in the skeletal muscles of BAC fxAR121 male mice, this study revealed a crucial role for muscle expression of mutated AR in SBMA disease pathogenesis. Hence, this work predicts that muscle-directed therapies hold great promise as definitive treatments for SBMA motor neuron degeneration. Another study sought to ameliorate toxicity in mouse models of SBMA by suppressing polyQ-AR expression using antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) [Lieberman et al 2014]. This investigation developed compounds to specifically target AR expression in the periphery, and using two mouse models, found that peripheral gene suppression of mutated AR rescues deficits in muscle weight, fiber size, and grip strength; reverses changes in muscle gene expression; and extends the life span of mutant males. Interestingly, delivery of an anti-AR ASO to the CNS also elicited a modest improvement in these disease read-outs in a SBMA mouse model, but was much less effective than peripheral delivery. Hence, this report, together with the genetic rescue study of SBMA [Cortes et al 2014], strongly suggests that peripheral administration of therapies directed to muscle should be explored in humans with SBMA. Preparations are underway to initiate a clinical trial of anti-AR ASO therapy via peripheral delivery in males with SBMA. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Administration of male hormones (testosterone and its analogs) is not effective in overcoming the androgen insensitivity.