http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/kindler

Management



Evaluation Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of the disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Kindler syndrome (KS), the following are recommended: Evaluation by a dermatologist for management of skin fragility, blistering, photosensitivity, and risk for squamous cell carcinoma Evaluation for mucosal involvement of the eyes (ophthalmologic consultation), mouth (dental consultation) GI tract (gastroenterology consultation), urethra, foreskin (in males) (urology consultation), and vagina (in females) (gynecology consultation) Evaluation of nutritional status, diet, and oral intake Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

No established treatment for Kindler syndrome exists. The goals of care are to treat manifestations and prevent complications. When possible, children with KS should be managed by a multidisciplinary team in a center experienced in caring for children with skin fragility. When possible, the team should include a dermatologist, pediatrician, ophthalmologist, dentist, gastroenterologist, urologist, nurse specialist, and dietitian. Skin. The following are recommended: Standard blister care in childhood. If a blister is not painful, it should be kept intact. Otherwise alleviate blister-related pain by draining the fluid using a sterile needle, leaving the overlying skin in place. Apply an ointment to the blister and cover it with nonstick gauze bandage. Antibiotics may be used to treat an infected blister. Protection from trauma, for example, by use of soft and protective clothing and avoiding contact sports to prevent physical trauma Use of moisturizers for dry, pruritic skin Sun-safety education, including use of high sun protective factor (>30 SPF) sunscreens, use of sun-protective clothing (hats and long-sleeve shirts) and avoidance of sun exposure as much as possible Pseudosyndactyly is usually relatively mild and does not require surgical treatment. 
Mucosal involvement Eyes. Lubrication of the cornea by artificial tears and eye drops and prevention of infections by use of local antibiotics; surgical correction of corneal scarring as needed by an ophthalmologist Mouth and periodontium. Regular dental care to ensure optimal oral hygiene to reduce periodontal disease 
Gastrointestinal tract Esophageal dilatation may be indicated for those with dysphagia. Esophageal strictures and stenosis may require fluoroscopically guided balloon dilations [Sadler et al 2006]. Temporary parenteral nutrition may be necessary when esophageal dysfunction is severe. Anal stenosis and bleeding requires regular laxatives. Severe colitis may require surgical bowel resection in some cases. Urethra. Meatal stenosis may require dilatation. Strictures may require stenting and/ or surgical intervention. Phimosis. Most males require circumcision [Penagos et al 2004].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Monitor for secondary iron-deficiency anemia.

Surveillance

Screen for premalignant keratoses and early squamous cell carcinomas starting in adolescence and repeat annually.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid sun exposure by using SFP>30 and sun-protective clothing.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Although the cutaneous manifestations of KS are not exacerbated by pregnancy, vaginal stenosis and labial synechiae have been reported; thus, obstetric planning, such as consideration of delivery by elective cesarean section, warrants consideration [Mansur et al 2007]. Of note, specialized perioperative cesarean section management is needed to protect vulnerable skin and mucosa. Breast-feeding is not advised because of the risk of blistering the breasts [Hayashi et al 2007].

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.