http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/kms

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with IGD, the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment of clinical manifestations of hypogonadism based on the age and sex of the individual, if not already performed as part of the diagnostic work up (see Diagnosis and Table 1) Assessment of laboratory findings* of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism if not already performed as part of the diagnostic work up * Serum concentration of LH (luteinizing hormone) and FSH (follicle-stimulating hormone) and in males total testosterone (T) <100 ng/dL and in females estradiol (E2) <50 pg/mL Assessment for presence of possible non-reproductive features including: renal ultrasound examination (to detect unilateral renal agenesis), hearing tests (to detect sensorineural hearing loss), skeletal survey (to detect limb/spine bony abnormalities), dental exam (to detect dental agenesis), eye exam (to detect iris and/or chorioretinal coloboma) and developmental assessment (if there is evidence of developmental delay) In addition to assessing the degree of hypogonadism/GnRH deficiency, potential deterioration in bone health that may have resulted from periods of low-circulating sex hormones needs to be addressed. Depending on the timing of puberty, duration of GnRH deficiency, and other osteoporotic risk factors (e.g., glucocorticoid excess, smoking), one should consider obtaining a bone mineral density study (see Prevention of Secondary Complications). Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

An expert European consensus statement on the management of IGD has recently been published [Boehm et al 2015] (full text). Typically, a definitive diagnosis of IGD is made around age 18 years. Occasionally, however, a high clinical suspicion of IGD may be present in an adolescent presenting with anosmia and delayed puberty or in an infant with microphallus and cryptorchidism.

Males with IGD Age ≥18 Years

Treatment options include sex steroids, gonadotropins, and pulsatile GnRH administration. Choice of therapy in adults is determined by the goal(s) of treatment (i.e., to induce and maintain secondary sex characteristics and/or to induce and maintain fertility). The selection of hormone replacement therapy is also based on the preference of the individual being treated; however, when fertility is not immediately desired, replacement with testosterone therapy is the most practical option. As the majority of individuals with IGD have not progressed through puberty at the time of diagnosis, initial therapy should be started at low doses and gradually increased to adult doses once the development of secondary sexual characteristics is achieved. 
Hormone replacement therapy for males not desiring fertility Testosterone therapy in the form of injectable and transdermal routes of testosterone administration is typically used to both induce puberty and maintain adult levels of testosterone. Recently nasal testosterone has become available but use has not been reported in patients with IGD. The injectable testosterone preparations have a “roller-coaster” pharmacokinetic effect, with peak and trough levels that can go to extraphysiologic levels; thus, the transdermal preparations have the added benefit of offering a more favorable pharmacokinetic profile. A typical adult dose of testosterone replacement is 200 mg of testosterone ester injection every two weeks or 5 g of a 1% testosterone gel every day. Doses do vary with newer testosterone preparations; manufacturer’s instructions should be followed for individual testosterone preparations. Men using topical androgen replacement must take care to avoid exposing other individuals to treated skin. Anecdotal reports suggest that the transmission of clinically effective levels of testosterone from the patient to other family members (including women and children) is possible with undesirable side effects. Once puberty is initiated, testosterone replacement therapy is usually required indefinitely to ensure normal sexual function and maintenance of proper muscle, bone, and red blood cell mass. However, in approximately 10% of males, reversal of IGD may occur; thus, if clinical evidence shows endogenous activity of the hypothalamo-pituitary-axis (e.g., testicular growth on testosterone, maintained testosterone levels despite missing/withholding therapy), a brief washout of testosterone therapy should be done with monitoring of testosterone levels. If testosterone levels fall, therapy should be reinitiated. If levels are normal, no further testosterone therapy will be required; serial monitoring of levels should be undertaken, as some individuals may require reinitiation of therapy. Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). An alternative to testosterone therapy, hCG injections promote testicular growth, normalize serum concentration of testosterone, and induce development of secondary sexual characteristics. In adults, treatment with hCG is usually initiated at 1,500 IU intramuscularly or subcutaneously every other day to normalize serum testosterone concentrations. Dose should be increased by increments of 250 IU if serum testosterone levels remain low. Treatment with hCG must be weighed against the increased risk of developing gynecomastia (resulting from the estrogen produced by stimulation of the testes with hCG). To some extent the risk of gynecomastia can be minimized by gradually reducing the dose of hCG to the minimum required to sustain a serum testosterone concentration in the mid-normal range (~500 ng/dL).

Male Infants/Adolescents with Suspicion of IGD

If IGD is clinically suspected (e.g., low testosterone levels with low/normal gonadotropins) low-dose testosterone or hCG therapy can be given in early infancy to boys with microphallus to increase penile length [Bin-Abbas et al 1999, Young 2012]. Since a definitive diagnosis of IGD may not be possible until age 18 years, after infancy these boys do not generally need to be treated until around the time of puberty. At this time, if a high suspicion of IGD remains (e.g., associated anosmia and delay in onset puberty), these subjects may benefit from early initiation of hormonal replacement therapy with either testosterone or hCG treatment early in the pubertal period. A suggestive puberty induction regimen in adolescents is to start a long-acting testosterone ester at a dose of 25-50 mg, given intramuscularly every two weeks. The doses can be gradually increased by 25-50 mg every two to three months until full virilization is achieved. Once adult doses (~200 mg/2 weeks) are reached, further adjustments are based on serum testosterone levels. Hormone replacement therapy for males desiring fertility (fertility induction in males). As testosterone replacement therapy suppresses spermatogenesis in the testes, gonadotropins or pulsatile GnRH therapy is usually required to realize the fertility potential in males. Gonadotropin therapy. In most males with IGD, a combination of gonadotropins (hCG along with either human menopausal gonadotropins [hMG] or recombinant FSH) is used to stimulate spermatogenesis. In males with very low testicular volumes (≤~8 mL) the initiating dose of hCG is usually 1,500 IU intramuscularly or subcutaneously every other day; FSH is added at doses ranging from 37.5 to 75 IU as either hMG or recombinant formulation. Trough serum testosterone concentrations (target: mid-normal range [~500 ng/dL]), trough serum FSH levels (target: mid-normal reference range), and sperm count are monitored to assess response. Recent trials show that in those with lower testicular volumes, priming with FSH prior to combination therapy may improve spermatogenic outcomes [Dwyer et al 2013]. In males with higher baseline testicular volumes, treatment with hCG alone may be sufficient to achieve spermatogenesis and conception [Burris et al 1988]. However, if after six to nine months, semen analysis reveals persistent azoospermia or marked oligospermia, FSH is added to the regimen at doses ranging from 37.5 to 75 IU as either hMG or a recombinant formulation. In either treatment, testicular volume must be tracked, as this is one of the primary determinants of successful spermatogenesis. In fact, sperm are rarely seen in the semen analysis until testicular volume reaches 8 mL [Whitcomb & Crowley 1990]. In most males without a history of cryptorchidism, sperm function is usually normal and conception can occur even with relatively low sperm counts. Note: Liu et al [2009] have noted that previous treatment with gonadotropins may reduce the period of subsequent gonadotropin treatment required for initiation of spermatogenesis. If a pituitary defect exists, gonadotropin therapy becomes the treatment of choice. Pulsatile GnRH stimulation vs. gonadotropin therapy. While either gonadotropin therapy or pulsatile GnRH stimulation can induce spermatogenesis in approximately 90%-95% of men with IGD, some men have a better response to pulsatile GnRH stimulation than to gonadotropin therapy. Subcutaneous administration of GnRH in a pulsatile manner through a portable pump that delivers a GnRH bolus every two hours is an efficient way of inducing testicular growth and spermatogenesis [Pitteloud et al 2002b]. As the primary defect of IGD is typically localized to the hypothalamus, the pituitary responds appropriately to physiologic doses of GnRH. Note: In the US, pulsatile GnRH therapy is not currently approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of infertility in men and, thus, is available for such treatment only at specialized research centers.

Females with IGD

Hormone replacement therapy for females not desiring fertility. Although a definitive diagnosis of IGD in females is usually made around age 18 years, occasionally a high clinical suspicion of IGD may be present in an adolescent presenting with anosmia and delayed puberty, and therapy may need to be initiated earlier (age ~14 years) To allow optimal breast development, initial treatment should consist of unopposed estrogen replacement via oral or topical preparations. Many formulations of estrogens are available; a suggested oral regimen is using premarin 0.3 mg daily to be increased gradually to an adult replacement dose of 1-1.25 mg daily. Once breast development is optimal, a progestin should be added for endometrial protection (e.g., cyclical Prometrium® 200 mg daily for 10-12 days). Although preference of the individual plays an important role in choice of treatment plan, low-estrogen formulations should be considered in women with clotting abnormalities (see Factor V Leiden Thrombophilia and Prothrombin Thrombophilia). Hormone replacement therapy for females desiring fertility (fertility induction in females). Pulsatile GnRH stimulation and exogenous gonadotropins are FDA approved for folliculogenesis in women with IGD. Either therapy should be administered with close supervision by physicians specializing in ovulation induction. Intravenous administration of GnRH at various frequencies throughout the menstrual cycle closely mimics the dynamics of normal menstrual cycles resulting in ovulation of a single follicle [Santoro et al 1986]. This therapy offers a clear advantage over the traditional treatment with exogenous gonadotropins, which results in higher rates of both multiple gestation and ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. For either approach, however, the rate of conception is approximately 30% per ovulatory cycle [Martin et al 1990].

Fertility Options in Patients with IGD if Fertility Induction is Unsuccessful

In vitro fertilization. Although successful spermatogenesis can be obtained in most males with IGD through pulsatile GnRH therapy or combined gonadotropin therapy, some men with KS caused by an ANOS1 (KAL1) pathogenic variant may have an atypical response to therapy [Sykiotis et al 2010a]. In those who respond to therapy, low sperm numbers can often result in conception; however, if infertility continues despite successful spermatogenesis or if spermatogenesis fails to occur, in vitro fertilization (IVF) is an option. Similarly, if spontaneous conception fails to occur in women with IGD who have undergone ovulation induction, IVF may be an option.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Optimal calcium and vitamin D intake should be encouraged and specific treatment for decreased bone mass with bisphosphonates should be considered depending on the degree of bone mineralization (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis).

Surveillance

Children of both sexes with findings suggestive of IGD (e.g., microphallus, anosmia) should be monitored at regular intervals from age 11 years onwards with the following: Assessment of sexual maturation by Tanner staging (Table 1) Measurement of serum concentrations of LH, FSH, and total testosterone (T) in males and estradiol (E2) in females Bone age determinations In individuals with a confirmed diagnosis of IGD, serum sex steroid levels (to guide optimal hormone replacement) and bone mineral density should be monitored at regular intervals.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from surveillance and prompt initiation of treatment. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known. However, a prepubertal child with a known pathogenic variant may progress through puberty in a normal fashion, delayed fashion, or not at all. Therefore, reevaluation of such individuals over time is important, and hormone treatment should be initiated only when IGD with impaired pubertal development is diagnosed. If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known, clinical review of at-risk relatives of pubertal age to assess clinical onset of signs of puberty and if delayed, to initiate appropriate therapy for pubertal induction. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.