http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/kos

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Kaufman oculocerebrofacial syndrome (KOS), the following evaluations are recommended: Developmental assessment Growth assessment, including assessment of feeding and nutrition Ophthalmologic evaluation for microcornea, cataract, ptosis, coloboma Hearing evaluation for sensorineural or mixed sensorineural/conductive hearing impairment Echocardiogram for congenital heart defects Evaluation for laryngomalacia if respiratory issues are present Evaluation for the presence of gastrointestinal reflux, bowel malrotation if indicated Evaluation of males for cryptorchidism Renal ultrasound examination for structural renal abnormalities and vesicoureteral reflux Hip ultrasound examination to evaluate for femoral head dislocation Evaluation of thyroid function; other hormone levels if clinically indicated Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 The following treatment recommendations are appropriate: Developmental. Educational intervention and speech therapy beginning in infancy Failure to thrive. Intervention for feeding problems as needed in infancy and childhood Eyes. Cataract and ptosis surgery if indicated Hearing loss. Hearing aids or cochlear implant if needed Cardiac Function assessment and treatment if needed Genital anomalies. Orchidopexy in males with undescended testes Renal anomalies. Treatment of vesicoureteral reflux if indicated Skeletal. Referral to an orthopedist if joint dislocations or scoliosis is present, early referral to physical therapy Endocrine. Thyroid hormone replacement as needed Other facial. Cleft palate repair if present

Surveillance

 The following should be assessed at least annually: Growth Developmental progress Vision, hearing Contractures and/or scoliosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.