http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/krabbe

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Krabbe disease: Neurologic examination EEG Brain MRI and MRS

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment of individuals with infantile-onset Krabbe disease who are diagnosed in stage II or III is limited to supportive care to control irritability and spasticity.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) in presymptomatic infants [Escolar et al 2005] and older individuals with mild symptoms [Krivit et al 1998] provides a benefit over symptomatic treatment only. Treated individuals show improved and preserved cognitive function; however, many show progressive deterioration of peripheral nervous system findings. The availability of suitable donors has changed considerably with the use of umbilical cord blood for HSCT. The identification of newborns with the potential to develop Krabbe disease by newborn screening (presently in place in New York State) facilitates the initiation of treatment before neurologic damage has occurred. Concerns remain regarding the age at which to start treatment, prediction of clinical course without treatment, and long-term consequences of treatment. Given the significant clinical variability among individuals with late-onset forms (even those with the same genotype), evaluation of treatment effectiveness is difficult.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the disease has been identified in an affected family member, it is appropriate to test siblings so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment with HSCT using umbilical cord blood [Escolar et al 2005]. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Studies using the well-characterized animal models to investigate other treatment options including gene therapy, enzyme replacement therapy, neural stem cell transplantation, substrate reduction therapy, and chemical chaperone therapy are being conducted. However, at this time HSCT (bone marrow transplantation) is the most effective method of therapy in the mouse models of Krabbe disease. None of these other methods is ready for human trials. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

In utero HSCT in fetuses predicted to be affected with Krabbe disease has been tried three times with little success [Bambach et al 1997].