

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with L1 syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Head imaging study Complete neurologic evaluation Developmental evaluation Evaluation for Hirschsprung disease if there is a history of constipation Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Optimal management involves a multidisciplinary team with expertise in pediatrics, child neurology, neurosurgery, rehabilitation, and medical genetics. Hydrocephalus. Surgical treatment should be performed as needed. Shunting of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is indicated to reduce intracranial pressure. Of note, prenatal shunting procedures offer no advantage [Pinckert & Golbus 1988]. Intellectual disability. Developmental progress should be monitored and stimulated. Developmental outcome is variable and individual educational programming is important. Adducted thumbs. Surgical intervention is not generally indicated. . A splint may help reduce the degree of adduction. In some milder cases, tendon transfer may improve thumb function. Spastic paraplegia. Neurologic features should be monitored. Follow up and treatment is nonspecific; general guidelines can be followed.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Physiotherapy is recommended.

Surveillance

 Evaluation by a child neurologist at regular intervals is appropriate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Prenatal recognition of an affected fetus in case of an ungoing pregnancy requires multidisciplinary planning for a safe delivery for both mother and infant and for early evaluation and possible treatment for hydrocephalus shortly after birth.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.