

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Lafora disease (LD), the following are recommended: Clinical evaluation Evaluation of speech, walking, coordination, handwriting, school performance, and emotional status Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) have a major effect against generalized seizures, sometimes controlling seizures for many months. Generalized seizures are rare in individuals who are treated, even years after disease onset. Valproic acid is the traditional antiepileptic treatment for LD; because it is a broad-spectrum AED, it controls both the generalized tonic-clonic seizures and myoclonic jerks. Clonazepam can be used as an adjunctive medication for control of myoclonus, as in other forms of PME, although the literature does not provide clear evidence for its effect on myoclonus in LD. Zonisamide has had a significant effect on both seizures and myoclonus in a small number of individuals with Unverricht-Lundborg disease and Lafora disease. Both piracetam and levetiracetam have been effective, sustained, and well tolerated as add-on treatment for myoclonus in progressive myoclonus epilepsy (PME) [Koskiniemi et al 1998, Genton et al 1999, Fedi et al 2001, Crest et al 2004]. Levetiracetam had a significant effect on myoclonus in two sisters with LD [Boccella et al 2003]. Lohi et al [2006] reported that levetiracetam exacerbated seizures while improving myoclonus in two persons with LD.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Because the myoclonus associated with LD may be drug resistant, overmedication may be a risk in individuals with LD . Placement by percutaneous endoscopy of a gastrostomy tube for feeding can be helpful in decreasing the risk of aspiration pneumonia in individuals with advanced disease.

Surveillance

 Clinical and psychosocial evaluation should be performed at three- to six-month intervals throughout the teen years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 As in other forms of progressive myoclonus epilepsies, the use of phenytoin should be avoided. Anecdotal reports describe possible exacerbation of myoclonus with the following: Carbamazepine [Nanba & Maegaki 1999] Oxcarbazepine [Kaddurah & Holmes 2006] Lamotrigine [Cerminara et al 2004, Crespel et al 2005]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Work in animal models has shown that glycogen synthesis is requisite for glycogen accumulation and Lafora body formation; such glycogen accumulation is pathogenic [Turnbull et al 2011, Pederson et al 2013, Duran et al 2014, Turnbull et al 2014]. This suggests a therapeutic window for potential treatments using known and future small-molecule inhibitors of glycogen synthesis in individuals with LD. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.