http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/lal-def

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended: Complete blood count Complete fasting lipid profile, if not done at the time of diagnosis Liver function tests Upper endoscopy to evaluate individuals with severe liver disease for the presence of esophageal varices Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with sebelipase alfa was approved by the FDA in late 2015. Results from a Phase III clinical trial of 66 affected individuals demonstrated that ERT can be life saving for those with severe Wolman syndrome and life improving with prolonged survival in those who have cholesterol ester storage disease [Burton et al 2015]. ERT is administered intravenously at a dose of 1 mg/kg body weight every other week.

Wolman Disease

 Symptoms should generally be treated in a routine manner, while keeping in mind the limited life expectancy of infants with untreated Wolman disease. Malabsorption and malnutrition. Consultation with a nutrition team should be provided in an attempt to limit malnutrition to the extent possible. Parenteral nutrition is offered in many instances of intractable malabsorption. Hepatomegaly and liver disease. Liver transplantation can be considered for individuals who progress to cirrhosis and liver failure. Adrenal cortical insufficiency. Corticosteroid and mineralocorticoid replacement is indicated in the presence of insufficiency. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) has overall had mixed results, and requires further study [Gramatges et al 2009]. While successful engraftment can correct the metabolic defect [Stein et al 2007, Tolar et al 2009], HSCT can be associated with morbidity and mortality [Yanir et al 2013]. Consider discussion of comfort care options.

CESD

 Hyperlipidemia. Attempts should be made to reduce cholesterol through the use of statins, cholestyramine, ezetimibe,and a diet low in cholesterol and triglycerides [Gasche et al 1997, Dalgiç et al 2006, Chatrath et al 2009, Abello et al 2010]. Lipophilic vitamin supplementation may also be beneficial. Aggressive reduction of additional cardiovascular disease risk factors should be encouraged. Nutrition. Consultation with a nutrition team should be provided to children experiencing failure to thrive and to adults experiencing weight loss. Additionally, a nutrition team can assist individuals in the implementation of a diet low in cholesterol and triglycerides. Liver transplantation can be considered for individuals who progress to cirrhosis and liver failure. At least four case reports of successful liver transplantation for CESD have been reported, with post-operative improvement of lipid profiles and successful transplant out to five years in one individual [Ambler et al 2013].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Individuals found to have esophageal varices should be placed on nonspecific beta-blockers to reduce the risk of bleeding; beta-blockers have not been shown to prevent the formation of esophageal varices.

Surveillance

 No standard guidelines for the surveillance of individuals with LAL deficiency have been developed. The following screening practices can be considered to monitor for the most common symptoms associated with CESD. 
            Children Special attention should be paid to growth and nutritional status. Chronic diarrhea or failure to thrive could indicate malabsorption. Consider monitoring fasting lipid levels, platelet count, and liver enzymes every six months. Adults with CESD should be evaluated every six to 12 months depending on disease severity. Special attention should be paid to nutritional status. Chronic diarrhea or weight loss could indicate malabsorption. Monitor routinely fasting lipid levels, platelet count, and liver enzymes. Individuals with severe liver disease should be evaluated for esophageal varices by upper endoscopy every three years. Individuals with hepatosplenomegaly should be monitored and treated for thrombocytopenia to prevent bleeding complications. Both children and adults. Obtain serial liver and spleen imaging to monitor for hepatosplenic volume and to screen for hepatocellular carcinoma which has arisen in the setting of advanced cirrhosis [Riva et al 2008]. Consensus on optimal screening protocols has not been published.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Those with thrombocytopenia should avoid use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate the sibs of a proband in order to identify those who would benefit from early institution of treatment. If the LIPA pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. If the LIPA pathogenic variants in the family are not known, assay of lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) enzyme activity can be used to assist in the identification of affected sibs. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Clinical trials are underway for enzyme replacement therapy [Valayannopoulos et al 2014]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.