http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/lbsl

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with LBSL, the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Brain and spinal cord MRI

If possible, proton MRS of abnormal cerebral white matter

Physical therapy/occupational therapy assessment

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Supportive therapy includes the following:

Physical therapy and rehabilitation to improve motor function

The following as needed:

Antiepileptic drugs (AED) if epileptic seizures are present

Special education

Speech therapy

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Rehabilitation and physical therapy are helpful in the prevention of secondary complications, such as contractures and scoliosis.

Surveillance



LBSL is very slowly progressive in most cases. Annual clinical evaluations suffice. In case of rapid worsening more frequent evaluations are appropriate. Follow-up MRI can be performed once every few years. Only in severe, early-onset cases are more frequent evaluations necessary.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



The authors are aware of several affected mothers who have had children. There do not appear to be specific risks for the mother or fetus other than the risk of recurrence of LBSL in the fetus (see Genetic Counseling).

Therapies Under Investigation



Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Studies of muscle biopsies, fibroblasts, and lymphoblasts show no evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction; therefore, there is no rationale for the “mitochondrial cocktail” of vitamins and cofactors, often given to persons with mitochondrial dysfunction.