http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/lca

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA), the following evaluations are recommended: Electroretinogram (ERG) to confirm the diagnosis and to assess retinal function Clinical genetic assessment to evaluate for the presence of systemic abnormalities Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Except for RPE65-related LCA (see Therapies Under Investigation), no substantial treatment or cure for LCA exists, and, thus, care is supportive. Parents should be referred to programs for the visually impaired child within their state or locality. Affected individuals benefit from correction of refractive error, use of low-vision aids when possible, and optimal access to educational and work-related opportunities.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Children should be discouraged from repeatedly poking and pressing on their eyes, although attempts to alter such behavior are not always successful.

Surveillance

Affected individuals should be periodically seen for assessment of vision, trials of correction for refractive error, and when residual vision is present, assessment of the presence of amblyopia, glaucoma, or cataract. Rarely, vision appears to improve beyond expectations; in such cases, a repeat ERG is indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

In a naturally occurring Briard dog model of LCA resulting from mutation of RPE65, gene therapy utilizing AAV-mediated RPE65 was shown to restore visual function, an effect that has been documented to last for more than five years [Acland et al 2005]. More than 50 dogs have now been treated, with sustained success in 95% of treated eyes. The results of three simultaneous Phase I clinical treatment trials of AAV-mediated RPE65 gene therapy in humans were recently reported [Bainbridge et al 2008, Cideciyan et al 2008, Hauswirth et al 2008, Maguire et al 2008]. Initial results demonstrated safety, and showed slight improvement in vision in both bright and dim light. Clinical and laboratory studies suggest that persons with CEP290-related LCA may also be good candidates for gene therapy. =Cideciyan et al [2008] studied the retinal architecture of CEP290-mutant mice and humans. In the mouse retina, dramatic retinal remodeling was evident by age four to six weeks. Cross-sectional imaging of affected human retinas performed using optical coherence tomography (OCT) indicated preservation of foveal cones. The relative sparing of foveal cone cells, despite severe visual dysfunction, suggests an opportunity for cell rescue. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.