http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/lds

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Referral to an ophthalmologist (preferably one familiar with distichiasis) for slit-lamp examination, as the extra lashes may be subtle and easily missed on clinical examination Physical examination to document the presence of manifestations and identify evidence of cellulitis Isotope lymphoscintigraphy to confirm underlying abnormality of the lymphatics as the cause of the edema Physical examination of the heart and possible echocardiography if murmur or arrhythmia is identified Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate: Conservative management of symptomatic distichiasis with lubrication or epilation (plucking), or more definitive management with cryotherapy, electrolysis, or lid splitting [O'Donnell & Collin 1993]. Recurrence is possible even with more definitive treatment. Referral to a lymphedema therapist for management of edema (fitting hosiery, massage). Although the edema cannot be cured, some improvement may be possible with the use of carefully fitted hosiery and/or bandaging, which may reduce the size of the swelling as well as the discomfort associated with it. Surgery for ptosis if clinically indicated (e.g., obscured vision, cosmetic appearance) Referral to neurosurgery for individuals with symptomatic spinal cysts (i.e., any neurologic signs or symptoms especially in the lower limbs) Conservative management of varicose veins if possible, as surgery could aggravate the edema and increase the risk of infection or cellulitis Standard treatment for scoliosis

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The implementation of hosiery prior to the development of lymphedema may be beneficial in reducing the extent of edema [P Mortimer, personal communication].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are appropriate: Prevention of secondary cellulitis in areas with lymphedema, particularly as cellulitis may aggravate the degree of edema. Prophylactic antibiotics (e.g., penicillin V 500 mg daily) are recommended for recurrent cellulitis. Prompt treatment of early cellulitis with appropriate antibiotics (See the British Lymphology Society Consensus Statement for information on appropriate antibiotics.) It may be necessary to give the first few doses intravenously if there is severe systemic upset. Prevention of foot infections, particularly athlete's foot/infected eczema by treatment with appropriate creams/ointments

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Edema may be exacerbated during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Diuretics are not effective in the treatment of lymphedema. Cosmetic surgery is often associated with disappointing results.