

Management



Treatment of Manifestations

 Specific treatment is possible for the following three nuclear gene-encoded Leigh-like syndromes: Biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease
(BTBGD) (also known as thiamine transporter-2 deficiency) (mutation of SLC19A3). Biotin (5-10 mg/kg/day) and thiamine (in doses ranging from 300-900 mg) should be given orally as early in the disease course as possible and continued lifelong. Symptoms typically resolve within days. Biotinidase deficiency
(BTD). All symptomatic children with profound biotinidase deficiency improve when treated with 5-10 mg of oral biotin per day. Biotin treatment should be continued lifelong in all individuals with profound biotinidase deficiency. Coenzyme Q10 biosynthesis deficiency
(PDSS2). Supplementation with oral coenzyme Q10 (10-30 mg/kg/day in children and 1200-3000 mg/day in adults) should be commenced as early in the disease course as possible and continued lifelong [Rahman et al 2012] Supportive management for any of the causes of nuclear gene-encoded Leigh syndrome includes the following: Acidosis. Sodium bicarbonate or sodium citrate is appropriate for acute exacerbations of acidosis. Seizures. Appropriate antiepileptic drugs tailored to the type of seizure should be administered under the supervision of a neurologist. Sodium valproate and barbiturates should be avoided because of their inhibitory effects on the mitochondrial respiratory chain [Melegh & Trombitas 1997, Anderson et al 2002]. 
                Dystonia Benzhexol, baclofen, tetrabenezine, and gabapentin may be useful, alone or in various combinations; an initial low dose should be started and gradually increased until symptom control is achieved or intolerable side effects occur. Botulinum toxin injection has also been used in individuals with Leigh syndrome and severe intractable dystonia. Cardiomyopathy. Medical therapy may be required and should be supervised by a cardiologist. Nutrition. Regular assessment of daily caloric intake and adequacy of dietary structure including micronutrients and feeding management is indicated. Psychological support for the affected individual and family is essential.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 For treatment of the following disorders, see Treatment of Manifestations. Thiamine transporter deficiency (mutation of SLC19A3) Biotinidase deficiency (BTD) Coenzyme Q10 biosynthesis defect (PDSS2)

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Anesthesia can potentially aggravate respiratory symptoms and precipitate respiratory failure; thus, careful consideration should be given to its use and to monitoring the individual prior to, during, and after its use [Shear & Tobias 2004, Niezgoda & Morgan 2013].

Surveillance

 Affected individuals should be followed at regular intervals (typically every 6-12 months) to monitor progression and the appearance of new manifestations. Neurologic, ophthalmologic, audiologic, and cardiologic evaluations are recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Sodium valproate and barbiturates should be avoided because of their inhibitory effect on the mitochondrial respiratory chain [Melegh & Trombitas 1997, Anderson et al 2002]. Dichloroacetate (DCA) reduces blood lactate by activating the PDH complex. A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of DCA in a different mitochondrial disease, MELAS, found no benefit and in fact documented a toxic effect of DCA on peripheral nerves [Kaufmann et al 2006]. A subsequent report described the results of long-term administration of DCA to 36 children with congenital lactic acidosis (randomized control trial followed by an open label extension) [Stacpoole et al 2008]. This study concluded that oral DCA is well tolerated in young children with congenital lactic acidosis and that it was not possible to determine whether the peripheral neuropathy associated with long-term DCA administration is attributable to the drug or to the underlying disease process. It therefore appears prudent for individuals with nuclear gene-encoded Leigh syndrome to avoid DCA, in view of the underlying risk for peripheral neuropathy caused by the disease itself in these conditions.