http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/lenz

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Lenz microphthalmia syndrome (LMS), the following evaluations are recommended: Physical examination for the presence of anomalies associated with the disorder Cranial MRI to estimate the size of the globes for prognosis regarding potential visual function and to detect concurrent CNS malformations such as hypoplastic corpus callosum and cingulate gyrus Visual evoked response testing and ophthalmologic examination to help determine visual acuity and/or the potential for vision Consideration of echocardiogram if physical exam detects findings suggestive of a congenital cardiac malformation. (A single case report from Japan described an infant with a molecularly confirmed LMS (BCOR p.Pro85Leu) dying of an unspecified cardiac defect at age six months [Suzumori et al 2013].) Renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for renal aplasia, hypoplasia, and hydroureter Consideration of hearing evaluation during infancy if: Head and neck examination reveals malformations of the auricle or ear canal, presence of skin tags or dimples around the ear, presence of cleft lip or palate, asymmetric facies, and microcephaly The parents have concerns that the child cannot hear (e.g., infant does not startle to loud noises, awaken to sound). The type of examination should be adjusted for the individual's cognitive level to allow for cooperation and maximize the chance of an informative test (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). Consideration of sleep evaluation if parents report excessive daytime somnolence, altered sleep-wake cycles, difficulty awakening the child or getting the child to fall asleep, apnea, loud snoring, and/or difficulty breathing while asleep Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals with anophthalmos or extreme microphthalmos benefit from regular evaluations by an ocularist for placement of serial enlarging orbital expanders to prevent deformation of facial structures and to encourage normal development of eye lashes and lid margins. Early intervention with physical therapy and occupational therapy helps to address disturbances of the sleep-wake cycle caused by lack of light perception and problems of delayed gross motor development often observed in children with visual impairment. Early intervention with special education maximizes cognitive development. Referral to services for the visually impaired is recommended. Treatment for hearing loss and sleep disorders is dependent on the specific defect and similar to the general population. Referral to a sleep disorder specialist may be necessary depending on the individual's history and presentation to determine the appropriate tests. Dental examinations and cleaning should be instituted to monitor dental hygiene, especially when the affected individual has cognitive developmental delay. Missing and irregularly shaped teeth and wide spacing of teeth are common. Treatment is the same as for the general population in restoring masticatory function.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

No special preventative care is recommended. Follow-up care is personalized based on the physical impairments found in the individual.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate: Annual ophthalmologic examination for those with residual vision given the predisposition to glaucoma and high hyperopia from foreshortening of the globe Monitoring of renal function (BUN, creatinine, and urine analysis) in those with known renal/ureteral anomalies Developmental assessments performed with each well-child visit as recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics. More frequent and specialized assessments are tailored to each child if development is not on track. Lifelong case management to help affected individuals gain access to social services and assistive devices for the blind

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

In those with residual vision, dilating drops and medications that may dilate the pupils (i.e., antihistamines, decongestants, tricyclic antidepressants) should be used in consultation with an ophthalmologist because of the narrow anterior chamber and risk for angle closure glaucoma.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.