http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/leopard

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines (NSML), the following evaluations are recommended:

Complete physical and neurologic examination

Plotting of growth parameters on Noonan syndrome growth charts by Witt et al [1986] (Specific growth charts for NSML are not available.)

Cardiac evaluation with echocardiography and electrocardiography

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Hearing evaluation including complete assessment of auditory acuity using age-appropriate tests (e.g., ABR testing, auditory steady-state response [ASSR] testing, pure tone audiometry)

Renal ultrasound examination; urinalysis if urinary tract abnormalities are identified

Clinical and radiographic assessment of spine and rib cage

Brain and cervical spine MRI if neurologic symptoms are present

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment of cardiovascular anomalies and cryptorchidism is usually the same as in the general population.

Treatment of hearing loss may include the following:

Fitting with appropriate hearing aids

Enrollment in an appropriate educational program for the hearing impaired

Consideration for cochlear implantation, a promising habilitation option for persons with profound deafness

Recognition that, as distinct from many clinical conditions, the management and treatment of severe-to-profound congenital deafness involves primarily the social welfare and educational systems rather than the medical care system [Smith et al 2005]

Any developmental disability should be addressed by early intervention programs and individualized education strategies.

Treatment of cryptorchidism in males is usually the same as in the general population.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



For individuals with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, certain physical activities may be curtailed in order to reduce the risk of sudden cardiac death.

For individuals diagnosed in infancy, early intervention may limit the extent of intellectual and developmental disabilities.

Surveillance



If anomalies are found in any system, periodic follow up should be planned and lifelong monitoring may be necessary, especially of cardiovascular abnormalities.

For hearing loss, twice-yearly examination by a physician familiar with hereditary hearing impairment and repeat audiometry to confirm the stability of the hearing loss is recommended.

Surveillance for intellectual and developmental disabilities as per routine pediatric care is of particular importance due to the higher prevalence of these issues in individuals with NSML.

Surveillance for growth delay as per routine pediatric care is important due to the higher prevalence of poor linear growth in affected children.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



For individuals with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, treatment with growth hormone must be undertaken with great caution, if at all, to avoid exacerbating a cardiac condition.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the PTPN11, RAF1,
BRAF, or MAP2K1 pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, a thorough physical examination with particular attention to the features of NSML may clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



For affected women, cardiac status should be monitored during pregnancy. Those with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or valve dysfunction may be at risk for the development or exacerbation of heart failure during pregnancy, especially during the second and third trimesters.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.