http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/leukodys-ov

Management



Treatment of Manifestations

Although the underlying mechanisms of leukodystrophies are diverse, many manifestations are similar across this group of disorders. In the great majority of cases, primary treatment is not possible, but management of symptoms can improve the comfort and care of individuals with these complex disorders. Ideally, the child or adult with a leukodystrophy is managed in a multidisciplinary setting by providers experienced in the care of persons with a leukodystrophy. Spasticity. Pharmacologic agents are used to manage muscle tone and block neuronal signaling to muscle (chemodenervaton). Intensive physical therapy is used to improve mobility and function. Extrapyramidal manifestations. Dystonia and dyskinesias may cause significant disability; pharmacologic treatment may result in significant functional improvement. Ataxia. No specific treatment of ataxia exists, although rehabilitative measures can be of great assistance. Seizures. Seizures should be treated with typical anticonvulsants and are rarely refractory, except on occasion at the end of life. Cognitive developmental delay/encephalopathy. It is important to advocate for persons with a leukodystrophy in school or at work to avoid limitations related to their motor disabilities. Augmentative communication may be used to address speech deficits. Accommodations for cognitive delays and fine motor disabilities should be used as needed. Orthopedic. Attention should be given to the prevention and treatment of orthopedic problems, such as hip dislocation and scoliosis. Feeding. Swallowing dysfunction and pulmonary problems resulting from the increased risk of aspiration are common as the disease progresses. Decreased nutritional intake and failure to thrive may also occur. The decision to place a gastrostomy tube for nutrition is based on the overall health status of the individual, expected disease course, and family and patient wishes.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Primary disease manifestations can be prevented in a few of the leukodystrophies: in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, Krabbe disease, and metachromatic leukodystrophy, for example, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) or bone marrow transplantation (BMT) may be beneficial if performed early in the disease course. Patients with these disorders should be referred to specialized centers for consideration of HSCT or BMT [Eichler et al 2009].

Surveillance

Standard surveillance includes the following: Routine measurement of weight and height to assess growth and nutritional status Physical examination and/or serial x-rays of the hips and spine to monitor for orthopedic complications Routine history re signs and symptoms of seizures Certain disorders require specialized surveillance, for example monitoring for the development of hydrocephalus in Alexander disease.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

In a number of leukodystrophies anecdotal evidence suggests episodic worsening of manifestations with mild head injuries and infection. While this has been clearly documented only for childhood ataxia with central nervous system hypomyelination/vanishing white matter, it appears prudent to avoid these triggers when possible.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.