http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/lhon

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON), the following evaluations are recommended: Measurement of best corrected visual acuity Assessment of visual fields with static or kinetic perimetry ECG. Although a relatively rare finding, an ECG may reveal a pre-excitation syndrome in both symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals who have a LHON-causing mtDNA variant. Even when present, such an ECG finding does not necessitate further intervention in the absence of cardiac symptoms. Screening for possible associated neurologic complications, which can further compound the visual impairment among individuals with LHON Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management of affected individuals is supportive and includes provision of visual aids, occupational rehabilitation, and registration with the relevant local social services. A minority of individuals with LHON develop neurologic features including ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, nonspecific myopathy, and movement disorders. This group of affected individuals should be managed by a multidisciplinary team of physicians and allied professionals to minimize the functional consequences of these neurologic complications. In those individuals who are found to have pre-excitation syndrome on ECG, referral to a cardiologist can be considered; treatment for symptomatic individuals with pre-excitation syndrome is the same as in the general population.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 There is evidence that raised intraocular pressure could be a risk factor triggering visual loss in individuals at risk for developing LHON. Until further evidence becomes available, it is reasonable to set a lower threshold for initiating treatment for raised intraocular pressure in individuals with a LHON-causing variant given the possible deleterious consequences of raised intraocular pressure on mitochondrial function and retinal ganglion cell survival [Thouin et al 2013].

Surveillance

 Ongoing surveillance of asymptomatic individuals harboring LHON-causing mtDNA variants is not necessary; however, they should be advised to seek immediate medical attention should they experience any visual disturbance. The frequency of follow-up for affected individuals varies depending on the individual’s personal circumstances and the availability of healthcare locally.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Individuals harboring established LHON-causing mtDNA variants should be strongly advised not to smoke and to moderate their alcohol intake, avoiding binge-drinking episodes. Although based largely on anecdotal evidence, avoidance of other environmental factors that have been implicated in precipitating visual loss in LHON (e.g., head trauma, industrial toxins, drugs with mitochondrial toxic effects) would seem reasonable.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Idebenone. Small case series have reported that oral administration of idebenone (a short-chain synthetic benzoquinone; 2,3-dimethoxy-5-methyl-6-(10-hydroxydecyl)-1,4-benzoquinone) and/or vitamin supplementation (B12 and C) can accelerate visual recovery and improve final visual outcome in patients with LHON [Mashima et al 2000, Carelli et al 2001]. A subsequent report of two individuals with LHON showed no visual benefit from idebenone and multivitamin supplementation [Barnils et al 2007]. To address these conflicting anecdotal findings, a Phase II double-blind randomized placebo-controlled trial was conducted to investigate the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of oral idebenone in LHON: RHODOS (Rescue of Hereditary Optic Disease Outpatient Study). In total, 85 affected individuals harboring one of the three primary mtDNA LHON-causing variants (m.3460G>A, m.11778G>A, and m.14484T>C) were successfully enrolled in this multicenter study [Klopstock et al 2013]. Research subjects were assigned in a two-to-one randomization ratio to receive either idebenone (at a dose of 300 mg/3x/day) or placebo. This dose of idebenone was found to be safe with no significant drug-related adverse events. Affected individuals with discordant visual acuities (defined as a difference of >0.2 LogMAR between the two eyes) and at highest risk for further visual loss in the least affected eye were more likely to benefit from treatment with idebenone [Klopstock et al 2011]. In the follow-up study (RHODOS-OFU), the beneficial effect of six months of treatment with idebenone appeared to persist despite discontinuation of the active medication at the end of the trial [Klopstock et al 2013]. In a large retrospective study involving 103 individuals with LHON, 44 with visual loss of one year’s duration or less were treated with idebenone and followed up for at least five years. A greater proportion of those in the treated group recovered vision compared with the untreated group, and the most consistent factor associated with visual recovery was an early initiation of treatment during the acute phase of the disease process [Carelli et al 2011]. It must be stressed that idebenone will not completely reverse the significant damage already sustained to the optic nerve, but in those affected individuals who do respond, there is an increased rate and likelihood of visual recovery compared with the known natural history. There is no evidence to support the prophylactic use of idebenone among asymptomatic individuals with LHON-causing mtDNA variants. EPI-743. In an open-label study of five individuals with acute LHON treated within 90 days of disease conversion, the antioxidant α-tocotrienol-quinone (EPI-743), a vitamin E derivative, has shown early promise [Sadun et al 2012]. An adequately powered, double-blind, randomized placebo-controlled trial is needed to confirm the visual benefit of this agent in both acute and chronic LHON [Sadun et al 2012]. Gene therapy. Targeted gene therapy for LHON is being actively explored for affected individuals harboring the m.11778G>A pathogenic variant [Qi et al 2003, Qi et al 2004, Qi et al 2007, Ellouze et al 2008, Lam et al 2010]. Promising pre-clinical data based on in vitro and rodent models have resulted in the recent launch of pivotal clinical trials for affected individuals with the m.11778G>A pathogenic variant involving the intravitreal injection of a modified adeno-associated virus (AAV2) vector carrying the replacement MTND4 subunit (see ClinicalTrials.gov). Hormone therapy. The marked male bias in LHON could reflect a protective influence of female sex hormones, and this hypothesis was recently investigated using LHON cybrid cell lines. Treatment with estrogens was found to reduce reactive oxygen species levels in these LHON cybrids, with increased activity of the antioxidant enzyme superoxide dismutase. These beneficial estrogenic effects translated into more efficient mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation [Giordano et al 2011]. Further research is needed to determine whether females with a LHON-causing variant are at increased risk for visual loss in the perimenopausal period and following the onset of menopause. Mitochondrial replacement. In vitro fertilization (IVF) techniques aimed at preventing the maternal transmission of mtDNA pathogenic variants from mother to child are being developed. Pronuclear transfer and metaphase II spindle transfer are the two approaches that are being investigated, and further experimental work to validate the safety and potential clinical applicability of these IVF strategies is currently ongoing [Tachibana et al 2009, Craven et al 2010, Chinnery et al 2014]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.