

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI), the following are recommended: Examination for evidence of infection Evaluation for problems relating to prematurity Evaluation by a dermatologist familiar with congenital ichthyosis Assessment of transepidermal water loss and hydration status Assessment of corneal hydration in babies with ectropion Assessment of feeding and nutrition status Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 For neonates, providing a moist environment in an isolette, preventing infection by hygienic handling, and treating infection are paramount. Petrolatum-based creams and ointments are used to keep the skin soft, supple, and hydrated. As the child becomes older, humidification with long baths, lubrication, and keratolytic agents such as alpha-hydroxy acid or urea preparations may be used to promote peeling and thinning of the stratum corneum. Topical salicylic acid preparations should be used very cautiously because of absorption. For individuals with ectropion, lubrication of the cornea with artificial tears or prescription ophthalmic ointments, especially at night, is helpful in preventing dessication of the cornea. Topical or oral retinoid therapy is recommended for those with severe skin involvement; however, side effects include bone toxicity and ligamentous calcifications from long-term use. Oral retinoid therapy should be used with great caution in women of child-bearing age because of concerns about teratogenicity. A detailed review of choice of retinoid, dosage, treatment duration, toxicity, monitoring, and disease-specific considerations for ARCI are provided by Digiovanna et al [2013].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 The following measures are appropriate: Prevention of infection in the newborn (pivotal to outcome) Prevention of dehydration Maintenance of body temperature; prevention of overheating Prevention of corneal drying High caloric diet Release of collodion membrane on digits, when necessary, to prevent reduced circulation leading to loss of digits Prevention of chest constriction resulting from tautness of membrane to assure adequate respiration

Surveillance

 Regular physical examination for evidence of infection and control of skin involvement is appropriate; frequency depends on the severity. In adults, regular surveillance for skin cancer is appropriate (cases with atypical melanocytic nevi, malignant melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and basal cell carcinoma have been reported) [Fernandes et al 2010, Natsuga et al 2011].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Skin irritants and overheating should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Affected mothers are at no specific disease-related risks during pregnancy. Anecdotal improvement of the ichthyosis with return to baseline after delivery has been reported.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.