http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/li-fraumeni

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Evaluation for cancer in an individual diagnosed with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) should be based on personal medical histories and to some extent, the specific pattern of cancer in the family. Testing can include comprehensive physical examination, neurologic examination, blood counts, imaging studies, endoscopies, and/or biopsies. Individuals diagnosed with or suspected of having LFS based on molecular or clinical criteria should seek a clinical genetics consultation to review the diagnosis and medical management recommendations.

Treatment of Manifestations

Women with LFS who develop breast cancer are encouraged to consider bilateral mastectomies (rather than lumpectomies) in order to reduce risks of developing a second primary breast tumor and avoid exposure to radiation therapy. However, most experts recommend that treatment efficacy be prioritized above concerns about late effects after careful analysis of risks and benefits. Aside from avoiding radiation therapy, LFS-related tumors are treated according to standard protocols.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Females with a germline TP53 pathogenic variant have the option of prophylactic mastectomy to reduce the risk for breast cancer [Thull & Vogel 2004]. Recent recommendations for colonoscopy may be considered surveillance as well as primary prevention of colorectal cancer. Counseling for avoidance of sun exposure, tobacco use, and exposure to other known or suspected carcinogens is encouraged.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Persons with a TP53 pathogenic variant are cautioned to avoid radiation therapy whenever possible in order to limit the risk for secondary radiation-induced malignancies [Evans et al 2006]. However, when radiation is considered medically necessary to improve the chance of survival from a given malignancy, it may be used at the discretion of the treating physician and patient. The concern regarding radiation carcinogenesis is based on older data. There is interest in examining risks associated with more modern techniques, which may be less carcinogenic. Data on possible sensitivity to the carcinogenic effects of modern chemotherapy regimens are considerably more limited. In rare cases, individuals with germline TP53 pathogenic variants have developed myelodysplastic syndrome and/or acute myeloid leukemia after treatment with radiation or chemotherapy for a prior tumor [Hisada et al 2001, Kuribayashi et al 2005, Talwalkar et al 2010].

Surveillance

Clinicians and families need to be aware that currently no monitoring regimens have been definitively proven as beneficial for children or adults with germline TP53 pathogenic variants. Nonetheless, this is an important area of ongoing investigation. The following is recommended: Children and adults should undergo comprehensive annual physical examination including careful skin and neurologic examinations. Clinicians should be aware of the high risks for rare, early-onset cancers and also for second malignancies in cancer survivors [NCCN 2012]. Individuals should pay close attention to any lingering symptoms and illnesses, particularly headaches, bone pain, or abdominal discomfort. When present, the individual should see a physician promptly for evaluation [Lindor et al 2008, NCCN 2012]. Women should undergo breast cancer monitoring, with annual breast MRI and twice-yearly clinical breast examination beginning at age 20-25 years. The use of mammograms has been controversial because of radiation exposure and limited sensitivity. When included, annual mammograms should alternate with breast MRI, with one modality every six months [Lindor et al 2008, NCCN 2012]. The following is suggested: Adults should consider routine screening for colorectal cancer with colonoscopy every two to three years beginning no later than age 25 years [NCCN 2012]. Individuals should consider organ-targeted surveillance based on the pattern of cancer observed in their family [NCCN 2012]. In adults with LFS, a pilot trial of screening [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET)/CT scans detected tumors in three of 15 individuals. However, significant concerns were raised regarding the potential adverse consequences of the radiation exposure associated with PET/CT scans [Masciari et al 2008]. For this reason, attention has shifted to the utilization of whole-body MRI for adults with TP53 pathogenic variants. Several groups have begun to utilize an intensive screening strategy including rapid whole-body MRI, brain MRI, abdominal ultrasound examination, and biochemical markers of adrenal cortical function. Preliminary data suggest that such a surveillance protocol may improve survival of individuals with LFS through presymptomatic detection of tumors [Villani et al 2011]. However, further prospective studies are needed to demonstrate the effectiveness of this protocol in adults and children with LFS. Individuals with LFS have been surveyed regarding their attitudes toward cancer surveillance, given its lack of known clinical benefit. Most individuals believed in the value of surveillance to detect tumors at an early stage and also reported psychological benefits (specifically, a sense of control and security) associated with participation in a regular surveillance program [Lammens et al 2010b].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

There is some evidence that TP53 pathogenic variants confer an increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation [Hisada et al 1998, Varley 2003, Wang et al 2003, Cohen et al 2005]. Thus, individuals with germline TP53 pathogenic variants should avoid or minimize exposure to diagnostic and therapeutic radiation whenever possible [Varley 2003, Evans et al 2006]. Radiation-induced second malignancies have been reported among individuals with germline TP53 pathogenic variants [Hisada et al 1998, Limacher et al 2001, Cohen et al 2005]. Detailed studies to more formally assess this risk are in development. Individuals with LFS are also encouraged to avoid or minimize exposures to known or suspected carcinogens, including sun exposure, tobacco use, occupational exposures, and excessive alcohol use, because the effects of carcinogenic exposures and germline TP53 pathogenic variants may be cumulative. For example, individuals with a germline TP53 pathogenic variant who smoke cigarettes have been shown to be at significantly increased risk of developing lung cancer than individuals with a germline TP53 pathogenic variant who do not smoke [Hwang et al 2003].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Once a TP53 pathogenic variant has been identified in a family, testing of at-risk relatives can identify those family members who also have the familial pathogenic variant and thus need increased surveillance and early intervention when a cancer is identified. However, families with LFS need to be cautioned that currently no definitive evidence demonstrates a benefit for increased surveillance or early intervention. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Women with LFS who are pregnant should bring any potential symptoms of cancer to the attention of their physicians. Women with LFS who are pregnant can continue to have clinical breast exams and/or breast imaging studies if indicated. There are no special recommendations for screening a fetus identified as having a germlineTP53 pathogenic variant. Once the infant is born, he or she can be evaluated for signs of cancer.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

The Li-Fraumeni Exploration (LiFE) Research Consortium, formed in 2010, is a collaborative group of clinicians, scientists, genetic counselors, and psychologists who work with families with LFS and individuals from families with LFS [Mai et al 2012].