http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/lipoid-p

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with lipoid proteinosis (LP), the following are recommended: Consultation with a dermatologist (or pediatric dermatologist) Consultation with an otolaryngologist if vocal cord infiltration leads to airway obstruction, recurrent upper respiratory infections, and/or impaired speech Evaluation for evidence of seizures if clinical findings are suggestive Evaluation for neuropsychiatric manifestations Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

There is no curative therapy for LP. Microlaryngoscopic excision of laryngeal deposits improves airway access and voice quality [Harper et al 1983]. Tracheostomy on occasion is required to ensure a safe airway in patients with significant airway obstruction [Richards & Bull 1973]. Seizures should be assessed and managed by a neurologist, using antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). Treatments of unproven efficacy. Although several reports have described variable success in treatment of skin and vocal cord lesions with dermabrasion, carbon dioxide laser surgery, D-penicillamine, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), corticosteroids, etretinate, acitretin, carbon dioxide laser, and surgical intervention, they are not widely used and their efficacy is unproven. Click here (pdf) for further details.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate: Routine follow up of children to monitor general health as well as psychomotor, emotional, and cognitive development Monitoring of the airway and vocal cords by an otolaryngologist

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.