

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with lateral meningocele syndrome (LMS), the following evaluations are recommended: Spine MRI to assess for meningoceles (if not performed at time of diagnosis) and neurosurgical assessment to evaluate the effect of lateral spinal meningocele size and location on neurologic function Brain MRI to assess for Chiari I malformation or hydrocephalus, if not performed at time of diagnosis Thorough physical and neurologic examination for signs of neuropathy, joint abnormalities, and abdominal hernias Neurocognitive assessment Assessment by general surgery for abdominal hernia repair Assessment by orthopedic surgery for symptomatic skeletal deformities. Visualization of the aortic arch by echocardiogram or MRI Urologic assessment for cryptorchidism if present Feeding assessment Hearing assessment Ophthalmologic assessment Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Specific treatment for LMS does not currently exist. Supportive management of the clinical finding depends on the involved system as outlined below. Lateral spinal meningoceles. Symptomatic treatment of neurologic sequelae (e.g., neurogenic bladder, paresthesias, back pain, and/or paraparesis) is as per routine. Although rarely required, surgical intervention may be necessary for neurologic manifestations secondary to meningocele size and location. When required, surgical approach is individualized and can include laminectomy for smaller meningoceles and costotransversectomy for larger meningoceles [Kim et al 2011]. Of note, the 55-year-old woman with LMS experienced irreversible nerve damage following surgery for two lumbosacral meningoceles (to manage back and referred neuropathic pain) [Castori et al 2014]. Psychomotor development. Provide timely supportive interventions as needed to optimize development through occupational therapy and education resources. 
            Musculoskeletal Management by specialists in chronic pain management or rehabilitation medicine as needed Physiotherapy to reduce risk for joint subluxation and dislocation Routine management of the following: Cleft palate Hearing loss Congenital cardiac defects Genitourinary abnormalities GERD. Note that a feeding tube may be necessary if persistent feeding difficulties result in failure to thrive.

Surveillance

 No surveillance guidelines for LMS have been published. Ongoing monitoring by the appropriate subspecialists for neurologic, developmental, musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, genitourinary, and/or gastrointestinal issues is indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.