http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/lns

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Complete blood count to evaluate for megaloblastic anemia Chemistry screen for uric acid concentration Neurologic examination Developmental/behavioral assessments Evaluation for renal calculi, usually by ultrasound examination of the abdomen Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Hyperuricemia. The overproduction of uric acid must be controlled to reduce the risk for nephrolithiasis, urate nephropathy, gouty arthritis, and tophi. Overproduction of uric acid can be controlled with allopurinol, which blocks the metabolism of hypoxanthine and xanthine into uric acid catalyzed by xanthine oxidase. The dose of allopurinol is adjusted to maintain the uric acid within normal limits. Note: Control of serum concentration of uric acid from birth using allopurinol has no effect on behavioral and neurologic symptoms. Allopurinol therapy results in the accumulation of hypoxanthine and xanthine; xanthine may also form stones. Therefore, care must be taken to avoid periods of relative dehydration that could concentrate the purine metabolites in the urinary system. Stones that develop in allopurinol-treated patients are usually composed of xanthine. A uric acid stone is an index of too little allopurinol. Hypoxanthine is soluble. Therefore, oxypurine analysis is useful in adjusting doses to maximize hypoxanthine. The allopurinol metabolite oxypurinol is also insoluble, and oxypurinol crystalluria has been observed with dehydration. Its concentration can also be monitored by oxypurine analysis of the urine. Renal stones that form despite allopurinol may require lithotripsy or surgery. Neurologic dysfunction. Spasticity can be managed by the administration of baclofen or benzodiazepines. Neurobehavioral symptoms. Currently, no uniformly effective intervention for managing the neurobehavioral aspects of the disease exists. Self-injurious and other deleterious behaviors are best managed by a combination of physical, behavioral [Olson & Houlihan 2000], psychiatric [Harris 2007], and medical interventions. Because stress increases self-injury, behavioral management through aversive techniques (which reduce self-injury in other conditions) actually increases self-injury in individuals with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. Virtually all affected individuals require physical restraints to prevent self-injury and are restrained more than 75% of the time, often at their own request and sometimes with restraints that would appear to be ineffective as they do not physically prevent biting. Families report that affected individuals are at ease when restrained. Sixty percent of individuals have their teeth extracted to avoid self-injury through biting. Families have found this to be an effective management technique. More conservative than tooth extraction are vital pulpotomy and coronal resection, which maintain the root portion of the tooth in the bone, an approach that may preserve alveolar bone [Lee et al 2002]. Behavioral extinction methods may be useful in a controlled setting for reducing self-injury, but seldom transfer well to the home setting [Harris 2007].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 The overproduction of uric acid can be controlled with allopurinol, which blocks the metabolism of hypoxanthine and xanthine into uric acid.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Adjustment of the dose of allopurinol is required to minimize the complication of nephrolithiasis. Virtually any reduction of hyperuricemia will prevent urate nephropathy.

Surveillance

 Appropriate surveillance includes the following: Monitor plasma uric acid concentration and urinary excretion of oxypurines. Review medical history for signs or symptoms of silent or active renal stones. Monitor affected individuals for early signs of self-injury.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Probenecid and other uricosuric drugs designed to reduce the serum concentration of uric acid are contraindicated because they augment the delivery of uric acid into the urinary system and raise the risk for acute anuria from deposition of uric acid crystals in the renal collecting system. Periods of relative dehydration are to be avoided because they could concentrate the purine metabolites in the urinary system and increase the risk for renal stones or urate nephropathy with resulting oliguria/anuria.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Prenatal testing or testing of males at risk for Lesch-Nyhan syndrome immediately after birth enables prompt initiation of allopurinol therapy. Some carrier females develop gout in later years; thus, establishing carrier status of female relatives through genetic testing may be valuable to their clinical management. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Elimination of self-injury and partial improvement of dystonia after deep brain stimulation in the globus pallidus was reported in a single patient [Taira et al 2003]. Of the small number of other individuals who have received this treatment, only one was successful; at least one died as a result of the procedure [Author, personal observation]. Deep brain stimulation must be considered experimental at present; evaluation of more affected individuals over longer periods is required to determine its effectiveness. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Recent studies suggesting that gabapentin and carbamazepine may help attenuate self-injury and other behavioral disturbances have not been confirmed in a long-term study. Treatment with S-adenosylmethionine has led to mixed results [Dolcetta et al 2013]. Treatment with intravenous AICAR was without effect on the behavior [Page et al 1995]. No medication has been consistently effective in controlling the extrapyramidal motor features of the disease. The following have been unsuccessful in reducing neurologic or behavioral symptoms: Partial exchange transfusion in two individuals Bone marrow transplantation (BMT). BMT in a mouse model of HPRT deficiency has had no effect on the neurologic manifestations [Wojcik et al 1999]. Bone marrow transplantation was also ineffective in humans [Nyhan et al 1986].