http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/loeys-dietz

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS), the following evaluations are recommended: Echocardiography. Aortic root measurements must be interpreted based on consideration of normal values for age and body size [Roman et al 1989]. Select findings may require the immediate attention of a cardiologist or cardiothoracic surgeon (e.g., severe aortic dilatation). MRA or CT scan with 3D reconstruction from head to pelvis to identify arterial aneurysms and arterial tortuosity throughout the arterial tree Note: Approximately half of the individuals with LDS studied had an aneurysm distant from the aortic root that would not have been detected by echocardiography. Radiographs to detect skeletal manifestations that may require attention by an orthopedist (e.g., severe scoliosis, cervical spine instability) Craniofacial examination for evidence of cleft palate and craniosynostosis Eye examination by an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders that includes: slit-lamp examination through a maximally dilated pupil for exclusion of lens (sub)luxation; careful refraction and visual correction, especially in young children at risk for amblyopia; specific assessment for retinal detachment and blue sclerae

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of LDS is most effective through the coordinated input of a multidisciplinary team of specialists including a medical geneticist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedist, and cardiothoracic surgeon. 
Cardiovascular All individuals with LDS should be managed in a medical center familiar with this condition. Two important considerations when managing cardiovascular features of LDS: Aortic dissection occurs at smaller aortic diameters than observed in Marfan syndrome. Vascular disease is not limited to the aortic root. Imaging of the complete arterial tree from the head through the pelvis by MRA or CTA is necessary. Beta-adrenergic blockers or other medications are used to reduce hemodynamic stress. Aneurysms are amenable to early and aggressive surgical intervention (in contrast to EDS, vascular type, in which surgery is used as a last resort because of the extremely high rate of intraoperative complications and death). Many individuals can receive a valve-sparing procedure that precludes the need for chronic anticoagulation. Given the safety and the increasing availability of the valve-sparing procedure: For young children with the most severe systemic findings of LDS, surgical repair of the ascending aorta should be considered once the maximal dimension exceeds the 99th percentile and the aortic annulus exceeds 1.8-2.0 cm, allowing the placement of a graft of sufficient size to accommodate growth. Additional factors including family history, rate of aortic root growth and aortic valve function can influence the timing of surgery. For adolescents and adults, surgical repair of the ascending aorta should be considered once the maximal dimension approaches 4.0 cm. This recommendation is based on both numerous examples of documented aortic dissection in adults with aortic root dimensions at or below 4.0 cm and the excellent response to prophylactic surgery. An extensive family history of larger aortic dimension without dissection could alter this practice for individual patients. Note: This practice may not eliminate risk of dissection and death, and earlier intervention based on family history or the affected individual’s personal assessment of risk versus benefit may be indicated. 
Skeletal Surgical fixation of cervical spine instability may be necessary to prevent damage to the spinal cord. Clubfeet require surgical correction by an orthopedic surgeon. Bone overgrowth and ligamentous laxity can lead to severe problems (including progressive scoliosis) and should be managed by an orthopedist; surgical stabilization of the spine may be required. Pectus excavatum can be severe; rarely, surgical intervention is medically (rather than cosmetically) indicated. Surgical intervention for protusio acetabulae is rarely indicated. Treatment focuses on pain control. Orthotics are only indicated for severe pes planus. Some individuals prefer use of arch supports; others find them irritating; the choice should be left to personal preference. Surgical intervention is rarely indicated or successful. Craniofacial. Cleft palate and craniosynostosis require management by a craniofacial team. Treatment of cleft palate and craniosynostosis is the same as in all other disorders with these malformations. Eye. The ocular manifestations of LDS should be managed by an ophthalmologist with expertise in connective tissue disorders. Careful and aggressive refraction and visual correction is mandatory in young children at risk for amblyopia. 
Other Dural ectasia is usually asymptomatic. No effective therapies for symptomatic dural ectasia currently exist. Hernias tend to recur after surgical intervention. A supporting mesh can be used during surgical repair to minimize recurrence risk. Optimal management of pneumothorax to prevent recurrence may require chemical or surgical pleurodesis or surgical removal of pulmonary blebs. Counseling regarding other life-threatening manifestations including spontaneous rupture of the spleen and bowel and the risks associated with pregnancy is recommended.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Use of subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE) prophylaxis should be considered for individuals with connective tissue disorders and documented evidence of mitral and/or aortic regurgitation undergoing dental work or other procedures expected to contaminate the bloodstream with bacteria. Because of a high risk of cervical spine instability, an x-ray of the cervical spine should be performed prior to intubation or any other procedure involving manipulation of the neck.

Surveillance

All individuals with LDS require echocardiography at frequent intervals to monitor the status of the ascending aorta. The frequency of MRA or CTA evaluations should be tailored to clinical findings. Individuals with cervical spine instability and severe or progressive scoliosis should be followed by an orthopedist.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided: Contact sports, competitive sports, and isometric exercise Note: Individuals can and should remain active with aerobic activities performed in moderation. Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system including routine use of decongestants Activities that cause joint injury or pain For individuals at risk for recurrent pneumothorax, breathing against a resistance (e.g., playing a brass instrument) or positive pressure ventilation (e.g., SCUBA diving)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the causal TGFBR1,
TGFBR2, SMAD3, or TGFB2 pathogenic variant is identified in the proband, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify genetic status of family members at risk to identify those individuals who need regular cardiovascular follow-up screening to detect aortic aneurysm early and initiate appropriate medical or surgical intervention. If the causal pathogenic variant is not known, relatives at risk should be evaluated for signs of the disorder. Echocardiography and extensive vascular imaging of relatives is indicated upon appreciation of any suspicious signs of LDS, and even in apparently unaffected individuals if findings are subtle in the index case. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy can be dangerous for women with LDS. Complications include aortic dissection/rupture or uterine rupture during pregnancy or delivery, or aortic dissection/rupture in the immediate postpartum period. Increased frequency of aortic imaging is recommended, both during pregnancy and in the weeks following delivery. However, with appropriate supervision and high-risk obstetrical management, women with Loeys-Dietz syndrome can tolerate pregnancy and delivery [Gutman et al 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation

Experimental evidence suggests that many manifestations of LDS relate to excess activation of and signaling by the growth factor TGFβ. Animal trials are underway to determine whether TGFβ antagonizing agents, such as angiotensin II receptor type 1 blockers, can slow or prevent manifestations of LDS. The safety and efficacy of such interventions has not been addressed for persons with LDS. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.