

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Lowe syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Infants should be evaluated for feeding problems and gastroesophageal reflux, including a pH probe study. Growth parameters should be measured and plotted on a growth chart. An ophthalmologic evaluation is needed to assess for cataract and glaucoma. Behavior problems may necessitate the use of anesthesia for eye examinations. Renal tubular function should be assessed by measurement of serum electrolytes, calcium, phosphorus and creatinine, and simultaneous urinalysis and random urine pH, electrolytes, calcium, phosphorus, creatinine, amino acids, protein and retinol binding protein, and/or N-acetyl glucosaminidase, if available. Interpretation of these results allows diagnosis of type 2 renal tubular acidosis, hypokalemia, phosphate wasting with decreased tubular reabsorption of phosphate (TRP), hypercalciuria (urine calcium/creatinine ratio >0.02), amino aciduria, albuminuria (urine dipstick positive albumin and urine protein/creatinine ratio >0.2), low molecular-weight proteinuria, and renal glomerular insufficiency (serum creatinine). If acidosis or phosphaturia is present, serum concentration of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D and parathyroid hormone should be measured and bone radiographs should be obtained to evaluate for renal rickets. Bone radiographs should also be obtained in boys with bone pain or point tenderness to evaluate for fractures in the absence of rickets. If hematuria or hypercalciuria is present, a renal ultrasound examination should be performed to screen for nephrocalcinosis and nephrolithiasis. Plasma carnitinine may be measured to evaluate for carnintine deficiency. Developmental and behavioral evaluations should be completed. An electroencephalogram (EEG) is often needed to document the exact type of seizures and to determine appropriate anticonvulsant therapy.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management of the varying clinical problems usually requires more than one medical specialist; experts in pediatric ophthalmology, nephrology, clinical biochemical genetics, metabolism, nutrition, endocrinology, neurology, child development, behavior, rehabilitation, general surgery, orthopedics, or dentistry may be involved. Eyes. Treatment of the eye problems usually requires an experienced (preferably pediatric) ophthalmologist; cataract surgeons and glaucoma specialists may also be needed. Early removal of cataracts is recommended to promote proper visual stimulation and development. Postoperatively, eyeglasses or contact lenses help to improve vision. Surgical implantation of artificial lenses is not recommended because of the high prevalence of infantile glaucoma. Despite management with medical and surgical measures, glaucoma is often difficult to control. Special services for the visually handicapped should be included in any rehabilitation plan. Central nervous system. In infancy, feeding and nutrition problems related to hypotonia may be substantial. Occasionally, nasogastric tube feedings or feeding gastrostomy, with or without fundoplication, may be necessary to achieve appropriate nutrition. Occupational or speech therapists who specialize in feeding problems may be of assistance. Gastroesophageal reflux usually responds to standard anti-reflux measures such as thickened feedings and elevation of the head of the bed. Some individuals need medications to control gastric acidity and to promote gastric emptying; others require surgery. Most seizure disorders can be controlled with anticonvulsant therapy. Programs to promote optimal psychomotor development should be started in early infancy. Early childhood and preschool intervention programs, e.g., First Steps or Head Start, and later public or private school programs should evaluate the abilities and specific needs of the child and formulate an individualized educational plan (IEP). Physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech and language therapy, special education services, and services for the visually impaired are usually included in the plan. A behavior modification plan along with antidepressant and/or antipsychotic medications may be needed for behavior control. Kidney. Those individuals with renal Fanconi syndrome and type 2 renal acidosis should be treated with oral supplements of sodium and potassium bicarbonate or citrate to correct acidosis and hypokalemia. Doses need to be titrated to individual needs based on "trough" blood concentrations of serum electrolytes (sodium, potassium, chloride, and total carbon dioxide). (Trough levels are blood concentrations measured just before a scheduled dose.) Treatment with oral phosphate, along with oral calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3), is needed to correct hypophosphatemia and renal rickets of the Fanconi syndrome. Doses should also be titrated to individual needs based on trough blood concentration for phosphorus and serum concentrations of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, calcium, and intact parathyroid hormone. An increased requirement for fluids, along with the electrolyte and bicarbonate requirements, places affected individuals at high risk for metabolic imbalance during illness (especially those associated with vomiting or diarrhea) or when fasting, e.g., with surgical procedures. At such times, intravenous replacement of fluids, bicarbonate, and electrolytes is important and may need to be done in anticipation of problems to prevent severe electrolyte disturbances and dehydration. Progressive glomerulosclerosis likely results from progressive renal tubular injury, which eventually may lead to chronic renal failure and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) between the second and fourth decades of life [McSpadden 2000, Nussbaum & Suchy 2001]. Treatment of ESRD with chronic dialysis and renal transplant may be successful in selected patients [Tricot et al 2003]. Although experience is limited, at least seven adult men with Lowe syndrome and ESRD have been treated successfully over a few years, including three with chronic hemodialysis, one with chronic home peritoneal dialysis, and three with renal transplants [E Brewer, personal observation]. Other. Human growth hormone therapy has been used successfully to improve growth velocity in some boys [McSpadden 2000]. The potential benefits of such therapy must be weighed against its costs/limitations. Most undescended testes descend with time into the scrotum; some require hormone therapy and/or surgical correction. In older individuals, bracing or surgery may be needed to arrest or correct severe or progressive scoliosis and joint hypermobility. Resection of fibromas and cutaneous cysts may be needed if they are painful, have recurrent infections, or limit function.

Surveillance

 Eye evaluations should be done at regular intervals, depending on the type and severity of abnormality. No formal guidelines exist. Because approximately 50% of males either present with glaucoma or develop glaucoma in time, regardless of cataract surgery, intraocular pressure should be monitored at least every six months life-long. Presence of clinical findings suggestive of increased intraocular pressure (e.g., excessive tearing, eye rubbing, change in the clarity/transparency of the cornea) warrant prompt evaluation. Kidney function should be assessed at least yearly with measurement of serum concentrations of electrolyte, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, calcium, phosphorus, albumin, intact parathyroid hormone, and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. If the patient has Fanconi syndrome requiring therapy with supplemental bicarbonate or citrate, serum concentrations of phosphate or calcitriol should be measured every three to six months or more often after dose changes. BUN and serum creatinine are appropriate screening tests to detect the onset of chronic renal failure and to monitor its progression. Urinalysis and random urine protein, calcium, and creatinine are useful to follow proteinuria and hypercalciuria. If the patient has renal Fanconi syndrome and bone disease, radiographs of the long bones and growth plates should be obtained at regular intervals as needed, but no more than every six months. Growth should be monitored regularly with height/length and weight plotted on growth charts for age. Height/length and weight should be measured more frequently in infants (every 2-3 months) than in older children and adolescents who are still growing (every 3-6 months). If patients are treated with growth hormone, growth assessment every three months is indicated. Developmental progress should be assessed and the educational plan updated twice yearly for the first three years and annually after that. Any regression in abilities should be investigated with high-resolution imaging studies of the central nervous system. Scoliosis and joint problems should be monitored as part of a routine annual physical examination. Dental examinations should be performed twice a year by a pediatric dentist experienced in treating children with developmental delay.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Corneal contact lenses. Because of the associated risks of corneal keloid formation and the inherent difficulties that the person with Lowe syndrome has in managing personal contact lens care, conventional eye glasses seem safer than corneal contact lenses. Artificial lens implants. Although some infants have had primary intraocular lens implantation at the time of cataract surgery, the associated risk of glaucoma appears higher in those infants with artificial lens implants. Therefore, artificial lens implants should be used with extreme caution, with intraocular pressure carefully monitored (under anesthesia if required) on a continual basis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 To date, no effective treatment for the conjunctival and corneal keloids has been found. Families of affected individuals are often among the most knowledgeable about the problems and needs of their son(s) and must be advocates for them. Interested professionals, families, and other caregivers may contact the Lowe Syndrome Association for literature and additional information.