http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/lpi

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with lysinuric protein intolerance, the following evaluations are recommended: History for evidence of hyperammonemic crises with overt neurologic manifestations (vomiting, drowsiness, coma) and of respiratory involvement (cough, dyspnea, recurrent lower respiratory tract infections) Neurologic evaluation to detect secondary neurologic damage Respiratory evaluation including chest x-ray, pulmonary high-resolution computed tomography, and function tests Evaluation and follow-up of growth parameters Liver and spleen ultrasound examination to monitor liver structural changes and spleen enlargement Hematologic evaluation (bone marrow aspirate may be required) Immunologic assessment including plasma concentrations of immune globulins and, when clinically indicated, detection of autoimmune antibodies and immune complexes Renal function studies Bone density evaluation

Treatment of Manifestations

The management of individuals with LPI is similar to that described in urea cycle disorders. In LPI, the severity of hyperammonemic crises rarely requires extreme treatments such as dialysis and hemofiltration. It is recommended that individuals with LPI be cared for by a specialized metabolic team.

Treatment of Acute Hyperammonemic Crises

Pharmacologic management. Blocking the production of ammonia is accomplished by the intravenous administration of arginine chloride and of a combination of the nitrogen scavenger drugs sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate. An intravenous loading dose is followed by an oral maintenance dose of nitrogen scavenger drugs when the individual is stable. Depletion of branched chain amino acids (BCAAs) may occur as a consequence of the therapy with sodium phenylacetate [Scaglia 2010]. Persistence of BCAA deficiency hampers protein synthesis and induces catabolism. Therefore, careful evaluation of BCAA serum levels is recommended and specific supplementation may be required. Various detailed protocols for the treatment of intercurrent hyperammonemia in individuals with urea cycle disorders and, more generally, with hyperammonemia may be adopted [Singh 2007, Häberle 2011]. Reducing the amount of excess nitrogen in the diet and reducing catabolism through the introduction of energy supplied by carbohydrates and fat. In acutely ill individuals, energy should be provided as carbohydrate and fat, either intravenously as glucose and Intralipid® or orally as protein-free formula. Patients should be transitioned from parenteral to enteral feeds as soon as possible. Nasogastric tube feeding may be required to ensure adequate caloric and nutritional intake. Therapy with ondansetron can be started to decrease vomiting. Complete restriction of protein for more than 24-48 hours is not recommended as the individual will become protein catabolic for essential amino acids.

Long-Term Treatment

Dietary protein restriction and citrulline supplementation. Current treatment consists of dietary protein restriction (0.8-1.5 g/kg/day in children and 0.5-0.8 g/kg/day in adults) and supplementation with citrulline (100 mg/kg/day, in four doses taken with meals). Nitrogen scavenger drugs such as sodium benzoate (100-250 mg/kg/day in four divided doses) should be added to keep the lowest effective dosage of citrulline. As in the management of other inherited metabolic disorders, diet must be tailored on the basis of individual tolerance for the protein charge and carefully monitored to avoid disturbances of both growth and nutritional status. Measurement of orotic aciduria appears to be a sensitive tool for adjustment of treatment. Lysine supplementation. As lysine deficiency may contribute to the development of pathologic signs in LPI, oral supplementation with L-lysine-HCl should be attempted. Taking into account the defective intestinal absorption of lysine in LPI, small doses of L-lysine-HCl (0.05-0.5 mmol/kg, three times per day) are given and may normalize plasma lysine concentrations [Lukkarinen et al 2003]. Carnitine supplemetation. In a recent survey of 37 Finnish patients, hypocarnitemia was found to be associated with female sex, renal insufficiency, and the use of ammonia-scavenging drugs. When documented, hypocarnitemia should be corrected (25-50 mg/kg/day) [Korman et al 2002, Tanner et al 2008]. Additional therapies. Modification of the diet and fish oil supplementation should be tried in individuals with dyslipidemia before pharmacologic treatment of dyslipidemia is started.

Treatment of Late Complications

While hyperammonemia can be efficiently prevented and treated, no effective therapy has been established for late complications. Treatment of lung disease in LPI remains controversial: high-dose corticosteroid treatment was effective in a few patients when started early, whereas no response was noted in others. In individuals with pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP), treatment with granulocyte/monocyte colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) was shown to be ineffective or even to worsen the clinical course [Santamaria et al 2004]. Recently, increased GM-CSF and decreased bioavailability of surfactant protein D have been proposed as a part of the mechanism underlying PAP in LPI [Douda et al 2009]. Whole lung lavage still remains the best therapeutic approach for PAP in LPI [Ceruti et al 2007]; however, relapses may require serial lavage. Heart-lung transplantation was attempted with a temporary successful result, but it did not prevent a fatal return of the lung disease [Santamaria et al 2004]. Bone marrow transplantation has been discussed as a possible treatment for PAP in LPI. The rationale of this therapeutic approach would rely on the hypothesis of a defective function of lung macrophages [Barilli et al 2010, Sebastio et al 2011]. Treatment of renal disease in LPI should follow the standard guidelines under direction of the nephrologist. Treatment of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis/macrophagic activation syndrome in LPI should be planned under the direction of the specialist.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The prevention of metabolic abnormality is the goal of the treatment. Long-term management is based on protein-restricted diet and administration of citrulline (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The onset and the clinical course of the secondary complications, such as lung and renal involvement, seem to be poorly influenced by early treatment. Efforts to minimize the risk of respiratory infections should be promoted. An individual with LPI without previous history of chickenpox or varicella zoster should be vaccinated or, if exposed to varicella, treated as an immune-compromised person. Some individuals with LPI may respond poorly to polysaccharide-containing vaccines. Therefore, revaccination may be required if specific antibody titers are non-protective.

Surveillance

Individuals with LPI should be referred for follow-up to physicians with expertise in the treatment of inborn errors of metabolism. The age of the patient and the severity of the clinical features determine the frequency of clinical visits and monitoring. Monitoring should include the following: Plasma concentrations of amino acids to identify deficiencies of essential amino acids induced by the protein-restricted diet (similar to that used in urea cycle disorders) Attention to early signs of hyperammonemia including lethargy, nausea, vomiting, and poor feeding in young children, and headache and mood changes in older children Fasting and postprandial blood ammonia concentrations Urinary orotic acid excretion Evaluation of renal function Attention to early clinical signs of lung involvement Serum concentrations of LDH and ferritin The development of a multiorgan pathology in LPI requires careful surveillance of several complications including lung and renal diseases and osteoporosis. No specific guidelines have been proposed. Therefore, a tailored approach is necessary for the follow-up of a specific complication.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Large boluses of protein or amino acids should be avoided. It is not clear whether prolonged fasting may trigger hyperammonemic crises.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If the pathogenic variants have been identified in an affected family member, it is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to at-risk sibs in order to reduce morbidity and mortality through early diagnosis and treatment. When molecular testing is not available, early diagnosis of at-risk sibs relies on careful clinical evaluation and determination of plasma and urinary amino acid concentrations and orotic acid urinary excretion. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Alendronate. Osteopenia leading to osteoporosis is a major feature of LPI. Many individuals with LPI show osteopenia or osteoporosis despite treatment. Treatment with alendronate has recently been attempted in a child with LPI [Gömez et al 2006]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

No treatment, including strict compliance with dietary regimen, citrulline supplementation, or high-dose corticosteroids, is effective in influencing the clinical course of the renal disease.