http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/lpl

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with familial lipoprotein lipase (LPL) deficiency, measurement of plasma triglyceride concentration is recommended. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor may also be considered.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Medical nutrition therapy. Morbidity and mortality can be prevented by maintaining plasma triglyceride concentration at less than 2000 mg/dL; a good clinical goal is less than 1000 mg/dL [Viljoen & Wierzbicki 2012]. Restriction of dietary fat to no more than 20 g/day or 15% of total energy intake is usually sufficient to reduce plasma triglyceride concentration and to keep the individual with familial LPL deficiency free of symptoms. Medium-chain triglycerides may be used for cooking, as they are absorbed directly into the portal vein without becoming incorporated into chylomicron triglyceride. The success of therapy depends on the individual's acceptance of the fat restriction, including both unsaturated and saturated fat. Note: Fish oil supplements, which are effective in disorders of excess hepatic triglyceride production, are not effective in LPL deficiency and are contraindicated (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). The enlarged liver and spleen can return to normal size within one week of lowering of triglyceride concentrations. The xanthomas can clear over the course of weeks to months. Recurrent or persistent eruptive xanthomas indicate inadequate therapy. Pancreatitis associated with the chylomicronemia syndrome is treated in the manner typical for other forms of pancreatitis. Discontinuation of oral fat intake stops chylomicron triglyceride formation, and replacement with hypocaloric parenteral nutrition decreases VLDL triglyceride production. Administration of excess calories, as in hyperalimentation, is contraindicated in the acute state. The intravenous administration of lipid emulsions may lead to persistent or recurrent pancreatitis. If recurrent pancreatitis with severe hypertriglyceridemia occurs, total dietary fat intake needs to be reduced.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 See Treatment of Manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Prevention of recurrent acute pancreatitis decreases the risk of developing diabetes mellitus. Fat malabsorption is very rare.

Surveillance

 Plasma triglyceride levels need to be followed over time to evaluate the affected individual’s success in following the very low-fat dietary recommendations. When the triglyceride level is above 1000 mg/dL, a fasting sample is not required for this evaluation. Other components of the lipid profile do not need to be routinely measured. Affected individuals who develop abdominal pain need to contact their physician.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoidance of agents known to increase endogenous triglyceride concentration such as alcohol, oral estrogens, diuretics, isotretinoin, glucocorticoids, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and beta-adrenergic blocking agents is recommended. Fish oil supplements are contraindicated as they contribute to chylomicron levels.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk sibs during infancy. Early diagnosis and implementation of dietary fat intake restriction can prevent symptoms and related medical complications. Evaluations can include: Measurement of plasma triglyceride concentration; Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 During pregnancy in a woman with LPL deficiency, extreme dietary fat restriction to less than two grams per day during the second and third trimester with close monitoring of plasma triglyceride concentration can result in delivery of a normal infant with normal plasma concentrations of essential fatty acids [Al-Shali et al 2002]. One woman with LPL deficiency delivered a normal child following a one-gram per day fat diet and treatment with gemfibrozil (600 mg/day) [Tsai et al 2004]. Despite concerns about the possibility of essential fatty acid deficiency in the newborn, normal essential fatty acids were found in cord blood, as were normal levels of fibrate metabolites. See MotherToBaby for further information on medication use during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

 LPL gene therapy is available in Europe and the US for the treatment of familial LPL deficiency. It consists of the LPL Ser447Ter variant in an adeno-associated virus serotype 1 (alipogene tiparvovec). Twenty percent of the general population has the Ser447Ter allelic variant, which results in a prematurely truncated LPL that is associated with increased lipolytic function and an anti-atherogenic lipid profile and can therefore be regarded as a naturally occurring gain-of-function variant (reviewed by Gaudet et al [2013]). Note that the standard nomenclature for this variant is NP_000228.1:p.Ser474Ter (NM_000237.2:c.1421C>G). Several other targeted therapies are in development or under investigation, including inhibitors of microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) [Sacks et al 2014], diacylglycerol acyl transferase 1 (DGAT1) [Meyers et al 2015], apoC-III [Gaudet et al 2014], and angiopoietin-like protein 3 (ANGPTL3) [Gryn & Hegele 2015]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 The lipid-lowering drugs that are used to treat other disorders of lipid metabolism are not effective in individuals with familial LPL deficiency. Although plasmapheresis and antioxidant therapy have been suggested as treatment for pancreatitis, they do not appear to be needed for either acute therapy or long-term care.