

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with LTBP4-related cutis laxa, the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment of lung function, including oxygen saturation, spirometry, lung volumes, and diffusion capacity Chest x-ray or high-resolution CT scan Ultrasound examination of the genitourinary tract Bladder ultrasound examination to diagnose multiple bladder diverticula Echocardiography Physiotherapeutic evaluation (hypotonia, hyperlaxity) Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor On clinical indication: Bronchoscopy Visualization of the gastrointestinal tract by gastrographin ingestion or enema Pulmonary vessel angiogram If necessary, bladder ultrasound can be complemented with a voiding cystoureterogram. Due to the potential presence of urethral diverticula, catheterization should be done carefully. Intravenous pyelogram may be an alternative.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Experience in treating patients with LTBP4-related cutis laxa is very limited. Treatment is largely symptomatic. A reasonable approach to treatment could include the following: 
            Pulmonary
           Symptomatic treatment of pulmonary emphysema with inhaled corticosteroids, atropine, and selective β2-adrenergic bronchodilation Oxygen supplementation if necessary 
            Gastrointestinal
           Medical treatment of gastroesophageal reflux to reduce discomfort and reactive bronchospasms Feeding of mother’s milk in infants to maximize passive immunization Dietary advice, sufficient fluid intake and, if necessary, osmotic laxatives to avoid chronic constipation 
            Genitourinary
           Education on complete bladder emptying when voiding Antibiotic prophylaxis in case of incomplete voiding and recurrent urinary tract infections Pelvic floor strengthening by physical therapy may help to prevent prolapse of pelvic organs Consideration of artificial bladder implantation (performed in 1 patient) 
            Cardiovascular
           Care by a (pediatric) cardiologist with experience in connective tissue pathology Treatment of clinically relevant pulmonary artery stenosis (preferably by catheterization which is minimally invasive and needs a shorter period of anesthesia) Medical treatment of pulmonary hypertension (e.g., by sildenafil) 
            Other
           Surgical treatment of congenital diaphragmatic hernia or severe hiatal hernia Caution in surgical treatment of cutis laxa and inguinal or umbilical hernia, as the risk of recurrence is likely to be high (i.e., similar to that observed in other cutis laxa syndromes) and mechanical ventilation used during the procedure may aggravate pulmonary emphysema Physical therapy for muscle strength and joint stability Psychosocial support

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Immunize against respiratory infections (influenza, Streptococcus pneumonia, Haemophilus influenza). Passive immunization for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) with palivizumab may be considered during the RSV season.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Routine assessment of pulmonary function and oxygenation, at least yearly, or more frequently if indicated clinically Repeat imaging of: Gastrointestinal tract Urinary tract Cardiovascular system

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Positive pressure ventilation unless needed to treat life-threatening conditions Isometric exercise and contact sports or activities that increase the risk for blunt abdominal trauma and/or joint injury or pain People with respiratory infections Sunbathing or tanning in order to preserve any residual skin elasticity Smoking, which can result in rapid, severe loss of lung function in persons with LTBP4-related cutis laxa

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes. In one family, recurrent spontaneous abortions have been noted.

Pregnancy Management

 Affected mother. To date pregnancy has been observed in one affected female with an unaffected fetus. The pregnancy was uneventful, but delivery was induced because of elevated maternal blood pressure. Delivery was vaginal with normal healing and no signs of prolapse. Two years after delivery both the mother and her son were doing well. Despite evidence for the possibility of relatively normal pregnancy, a risk of aggravation of cardiopulmonary manifestations, and increased risk of both uterine rupture and exacerbation of pelvic floor/organ insufficiency including uterine, bladder, and rectal prolapse cannot be excluded based on this single case. Therefore, it is recommended that follow up of pregnancy and the postnatal period be done in a high-risk obstetric care unit with experience in connective tissue disorders. 
            Affected fetus
           Major complications, such as preterm premature rupture of membranes, have not been reported during pregnancy with affected fetuses. Polyhydramnios has been described in two instances in association with esophageal tortuosity or diverticulosis [Callewaert et al 2013].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.