

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with SHOX deficiency, physical examination with attention to the following is indicated [Rappold et al 2007, Binder 2011]: Growth parameters. Height, arm span, and sitting height. Calculate extremities to trunk ratio or sitting height to height ratio (see Diagnosis). Assessment of pubertal stage in preadolescents to determine if use of recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) is appropriate Madelung deformity. Prominence of distal ulna, limitation of forearm pronation and supination, and wrist pain 
                Scoliosis Body mass index that is frequently above the mean; mainly because of shortening of the legs

Treatment of Manifestations

 
            Short stature For prepubertal children with short stature, recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH therapy) (dose 50 µg/kg body weight/day) should be offered. The therapeutic effect is a gain in final height of 7 to 10 cm. Hand/wrist radiographs for bone age determination should be taken at the initial visit and annually during rhGH therapy to assess maturation tempo. Treatment with high-dose rhGH augments the growth of children with SHOX deficiency to the same extent as in Turner syndrome according to a two-year randomized controlled trial [Blum et al 2007]. This effect caused a similar gain in final height as well [Blum et al 2013]. No adverse radiologic effects were noted in those who were treated. Painful bilateral Madelung deformity (uncommon) Conservative management consists of wrist splints and supports during periods of increased discomfort and the use of ergonomic devices, such as ergonomic computer key boards. These measures may reduce wrist discomfort, but do not alter the natural history of the deformity [Fagg 1988, Schmidt-Rohlfing et al 2001]. Different operative procedures have been attempted to decrease pain, and restore wrist function [Anton et al 1938]; although Anton et al did not recommend operating until skeletal maturity because of concern that surgery at an early age may result in further deformity, Vickers & Nielsen [1992] and Schmidt-Rohlfing et al [2001] reported encouraging results from prophylactic physiolysis of the ulnar (lateral) aspect of the distal radius and excision of the Vickers ligament during mid-to-late childhood. Their rationale for early intervention is to alter the natural history of the deformity by excising the area of dyschondrosteosis in the distal radius, thus restoring growth in the distal radius [Vickers & Nielsen 1992]. They reported decreased pain, increased function, and a reduction in wrist deformity following surgery over a period of 15 months to 12 years of follow up. They also speculate that MRI may allow for the early detection and subsequent removal of the Vickers ligament, an abnormal fibro-elastic ligament that runs from the lunate to the ulna aspect of the distal radius that may play a central role in the development of Madelung deformity [Vickers & Nielsen 1992]. Similar results have been reported by Carter & Ezaki [2000] when a dome osteotomy of the radial metaphysis is combined with release of the Vickers ligament [Carter & Ezaki 2000].

Surveillance

 The growth of a child with SHOX deficiency should be monitored every six months.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 If Madelung deformity is associated with discomfort, physical activities such as lifting, gripping, writing, typing, and sports that strain the wrist should be limited and ergonomic aids sought [Fagg 1988].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate the siblings of a patient with SHOX deficiency in order to identify as early as possible those who would also benefit from recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) treatment. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.