http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/majeed

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Majeed syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Skeletal radiographs, if not already performed CBC, if not already performed Bone marrow biopsy if significant anemia is present Examination of the skin Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Because of the rarity of Majeed syndrome, treatment is empiric. CRMO is treated as follows: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), which provide moderate improvement. If there is an inadequate response to NSAIDs, corticosteroids are useful in controlling CRMO and skin manifestations; however, their long-term use in children is limited by side effects such as growth delay and cataracts. Tumor necrosis factor inhibitors and bisphosphonates have been reported to improve sporadic CRMO; however, the two individuals with Majeed syndrome treated with TNF-alpha inhibitors did not improve [Herlin et al 2013]. To date, bisphosphonates have not been used to treat individuals with Majeed syndrome; thus, their efficacy in this disorder is unknown. The same two affected individuals reported by Herlin et al who failed to improve with TNF blockade did respond to IL-1 blockade (IL-1 receptor antagonist [anakinra] and IL-1β antibody [canakinumab]) with clinical, radiographic, and laboratory evidence of improvement [Herlin et al 2013]. Physical therapy to avoid disuse atrophy of muscles or contractures CDA is treated with periodic monitoring with complete blood count (CBC) and blood transfusion if indicated. One patient had a splenectomy, after which the anemia markedly improved. In the two affected individuals reported by Herlin et al [2013] it is unclear if the CDA completely resolved, as a repeat bone marrow biopsy was not performed.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Physical therapy can help to prevent contractures.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Routine CBC to determine if red blood cell transfusion is necessary Regular pediatric care

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Prolonged bed rest should be avoided because it can result in joint contractures and disuse atrophy.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Three patients were treated with colchicine for four months with no improvement.