http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/maps

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with MUTYH -associated polyposis (MAP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Review of personal medical history with emphasis on those features related to MAP (or colorectal cancer): colon polyps with the majority being adenomas, colon cancer, rectal bleeding, abdominal pain and discomfort, bloating, diarrhea

Colonoscopy and review of pathology

Upper endoscopy and review of pathology

Baseline thyroid ultrasound examination at time of diagnosis as suggested by the Cleveland Clinic study [LaGuardia et al 2011]

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



In general, the treatment regarding gastrointestinal tumors is similar to that of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and atypical familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP) (see APC-Related Polyposis).

Colon polyps and colon cancer. Colonoscopy is effective surveillance for colon cancer; suspicious polyps should be removed (polypectomy) until polypectomy alone cannot manage the large size and density of the polyps. At that point either subtotal colectomy or proctocolectomy is performed based on polyp features and location [Lipton & Tomlinson 2006, Sampson & Jones 2009].

Duodenal polyps. Management of polyps is similar to individuals with FAP. In particular, large polyps or those polyps showing dysplasia or villous changes should be excised during endoscopy.

Abnormal thyroid findings should be evaluated by a thyroid specialist to determine what combination of monitoring, surgery, and/or fine needle aspiration (FNA) is appropriate [Cleveland Clinic study: LaGuardia et al 2011].

Surveillance



Individuals with Biallelic Germline 



In the US-based National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines [NCCN 2012]:

Pan colonoscopy should be performed every one to two years beginning at age 25-30 years. Following surgery, endoscopy of any remaining colon or rectum should be performed every one to two years.

Upper endoscopy and side viewing duodenoscopy should be performed every three to five years beginning at age 30-35 years.

At this time there is no consensus regarding screening intervals for thyroid abnormalities [LaGuardia et al 2011].

Regarding extraintestinal malignancies, to date no specific surveillance beyond existing protocols that are offered to the general population in most Western countries is recommended.

In Europe:

Recommended ages at which screening should begin differ based on the consensus meeting in Mallorca [Vasen et al 2008] (full text; registration or institutional access required):

Pan colonoscopy beginning at age 18-20 years

Upper endoscopy with side viewing duodenoscopy beginning at age 25-30 years

Recommended intervals between screenings depend on disease severity [Spigelman et al 1989]

Individuals Heterozygous for a Germline 



NCCN guidelines do not propose specific screening recommendations for individuals heterozygous for a germline MUTYH pathogenic variant.

Available data suggest that heterozygous relatives of individuals with MAP have a two- or at most threefold increase in their risk for colorectal cancer at an age similar to that in the general population (see Clinical Description, MUTYH heterozygotes). Thus, they are expected to benefit from population screening measures or could be offered average moderate-risk colorectal screening based on their family history [Jones et al 2009].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an individual with genetically confirmed MAP by molecular genetic testing of the MUTYH pathogenic variants identified in the proband in order to reduce morbidity and mortality in those who would benefit from appropriate surveillance, early diagnosis, and treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.