http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/marfan

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Marfan syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Evaluation by an ophthalmologist with expertise in Marfan syndrome, including: Slit lamp examination through a maximally dilated pupil to see lens subluxation Refraction and visual correction, especially in young children at risk for amblyopia Specific assessment for glaucoma and cataract Evaluation for skeletal manifestations that may require immediate attention by an orthopedist (e.g., severe scoliosis) Echocardiography Aortic root measurements must be interpreted based on consideration of normal values for age and body size. Click here. Selected findings may require the immediate attention of a cardiologist or cardiothoracic surgeon (e.g., severe valve dysfunction, severe aortic dilatation, congestive heart failure, history or evidence suggestive of arrhythmia). Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management is most effectively accomplished through the coordinated input of a multidisciplinary team of specialists including a geneticist, cardiologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedist, and cardiothoracic surgeon.

Eye

 The ocular manifestations should be managed by an ophthalmologist with expertise in Marfan syndrome. Most often, eye problems can be adequately controlled with eyeglasses alone. Lens dislocation can require surgical aphakia (removal of lens) if the lens is freely mobile or the margin of the lens obstructs vision. An artificial lens can be implanted once growth is complete. While this procedure is currently considered quite safe when performed in specialized centers, major complications, including retinal detachment, can occur. Careful and aggressive refraction and visual correction is mandatory in young children at risk for amblyopia.

Skeletal

 Bone overgrowth and ligamentous laxity can lead to severe problems (including progressive scoliosis) and should be managed by an orthopedist; surgical stabilization of the spine may be required. Pectus excavatum can be severe; in rare circumstances, surgical intervention is medically (rather than cosmetically) indicated. Protusio acetabulae can be associated with pain or functional limitations. Surgical intervention is rarely indicated. Pes planus is often associated with inward rotation at the ankle, contributing to difficulty with ambulation, leg fatigue, and muscle cramps. Orthotics are indicated only in severe cases. Some individuals prefer use of arch supports, while others find them irritating; the choice should be left to personal preference. Surgical intervention is rarely indicated or fully successful. Dental crowding may require orthodontia or use of a palatal expander. Use of hormone supplementation to limit adult height is rarely requested or considered. Complications can include the psychosocial burden of accelerated puberty, an accelerated rate of growth prior to final closure of the growth plate, and perhaps the undesirable consequences of the increased blood pressure associated with puberty on progression of aortic dilatation. This treatment should only be considered when an extreme height is anticipated. Marfan syndrome-specific growth curves now allow accurate prediction of adult height [Erkula et al 2002].

Cardiovascular

 Cardiovascular manifestations should be managed by a cardiologist who is familiar with Marfan syndrome. Surgical repair of the aorta is indicated once: (1) the maximal measurement approaches 5.0 cm in adults or older children, (2) the rate of increase of the aortic root diameter approaches 1.0 cm per year, or (3) there is progressive and severe aortic regurgitation. More aggressive therapy may be indicated in individuals with a family history of early aortic dissection. Many individuals can receive a valve-sparing procedure that precludes the need for chronic anticoagulation. Surgical guidelines for young children with Marfan syndrome are based upon far less clinical experience than for adults and older children, and need to be tailored to the clinical situation at hand. Aortic root surgery should be considered once: (1) the rate of increase of the aortic root diameter approaches 1.0 cm per year, or (2) there is progressive and severe aortic regurgitation. While there is no agreed upon absolute size threshold for the aortic root, many centers use the adult guideline of 5.0 cm given the extreme rarity of aortic dissection in young children. Every effort is made to allow the aortic annulus to reach a size of at least 2.0 cm, allowing placement of an aortic graft of sufficient size to accommodate body growth. Severe and progressive mitral valve regurgitation with attendant ventricular dysfunction is the leading indication for cardiovascular surgery in children with Marfan syndrome. In this circumstance, caution is warranted when considering concomitant aortic root surgery, as the increased length and complexity of the procedure can put extra strain on the myocardium and delay or compromise postoperative recovery. When congestive heart failure is present, afterload-reducing agents (in combination with a beta-blocker) can improve cardiovascular function, but surgical intervention may be indicated in refractory cases. Most often the mitral valve can be repaired, rather than replaced.

Other

 Dural ectasia is usually asymptomatic. No effective therapies for symptomatic dural ectasia currently exist. Hernias tend to recur after surgical intervention. A supporting mesh can be used during surgical repair to minimize this risk. Pneumothorax can be a recurrent problem. Optimal management may require chemical or surgical pleurodesis or surgical removal of pulmonary blebs.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Medications that reduce hemodynamic stress on the aortic wall, such as beta-blockers, are routinely prescribed. This therapy should be managed by a cardiologist or geneticist familiar with its use. Therapy is generally initiated at the time of diagnosis with Marfan syndrome at any age or upon appreciation of progressive aortic root dilatation even in the absence of a definitive diagnosis. The dose needs to be titrated to effect, keeping heart rate after submaximal exercise or agitation lower than 110 in young children or lower than 100 in older children or adults. Verapamil or other calcium channel blockers have been suggested if beta-blockers cannot be used (e.g., in individuals with asthma) or are not tolerated (e.g., prolonged lethargy, depression). Data documenting either the efficacy or safety of this approach in people with Marfan syndrome are very limited. Yetman et al [2005] suggested that use of ACE inhibitors may be more beneficial than beta-blockers. Of note, the treatments were not randomized and the dose of beta-blocker was not titrated to effect. ACE inhibitors have been used for decades in Marfan syndrome to manage volume overload resulting from valve dysfunction, and (unlike beta-blockers) have not previously been reported to provide notable protection from progressive aortic enlargement. There is at least some theoretic concern that reducing afterload without a concomitant reduction in inotropy (as provided by a beta-blocker) could increase hemodynamic stress in the ascending aorta. Currently, afterload-reducing agents are only commonly used in conjunction with a beta-blocker to manage volume overload in the setting of valve dysfunction.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Judicious use of subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE) prophylaxis is indicated for dental work or other procedures expected to contaminate the bloodstream with bacteria in the presence of mitral or aortic valve regurgitation.

Surveillance

 Eye. An annual ophthalmologic examination should include a specific assessment for glaucoma and cataracts. Skeletal. Individuals with severe or progressive scoliosis should be followed by an orthopedist. Cardiovascular. Echocardiography at frequent intervals to monitor the status of the ascending aorta is indicated: Yearly examinations when the aortic dimension is relatively small and the rate of aortic dilation is relatively slow More frequent examinations when the aortic root diameter exceeds approximately 4.5 centimeters in adults, the rate of aortic dilation exceeds approximately 0.5 cm per year, and significant aortic regurgitation is present More frequent evaluations by a cardiologist are indicated with severe or progressive valve or ventricular dysfunction or with documented or suspected arrhythmia. All individuals with Marfan syndrome should begin intermittent surveillance of the entire aorta with CT or MRA scans in young adulthood. Such imaging should be performed at least annually in anyone with a history of aortic root replacement or dissection.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 The following should be avoided: Contact sports, competitive sports, and isometric exercise. Note: Individuals can and should remain active with aerobic activities performed in moderation. Activities that cause joint injury or pain Agents that stimulate the cardiovascular system including routine use of decongestants. Caffeine can aggravate a tendency for arrhythmia. Agents that cause vasoconstriction, including triptans LASIK correction of visual deficits For individuals at risk for recurrent pneumothorax, breathing against resistance (e.g., playing a brass instrument) or positive pressure ventilation (e.g., SCUBA diving)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Relatives of an individual with Marfan syndrome should be evaluated for signs of the disorder. Molecular genetic evaluation of relatives at risk is possible if the FBN1 pathogenic variant has been identified in the proband. Echocardiography of relatives is indicated upon appreciation of any suspicious signs of Marfan syndrome, and even in apparently unaffected individuals if findings are subtle in the index case. It is generally appropriate to delay echocardiography for infants and toddlers until they can cooperate with the examination without needing sedation. Exceptions include those with evidence of valve dysfunction and/or congestive heart failure. Note: All first-degree relatives of an individual with apparent isolated aortic enlargement should be evaluated by echocardiography. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnancy should only be considered after appropriate counseling from a clinical geneticist or cardiologist familiar with this condition, a genetic counselor, and a high-risk obstetrician because of the risk of more rapid dilation of the aorta or aortic dissection either during pregnancy or delivery, or in the immediate postpartum period. This is especially relevant to women who begin pregnancy with a maximal aortic dimension that exceeds 4.0 cm. Note: Some women with Marfan syndrome and aortic root dilatation opt for elective aortic repair with a valve-sparing procedure prior to reaching a conventional threshold for surgical intervention (i.e. at a root dimension <5.0cm) before becoming pregnant. Pregnant women with Marfan syndrome should be followed by a high risk obstetrician both during pregnancy and through the immediate postpartum period. In women with Marfan syndrome who anticipate pregnancy or become pregnant, beta blockers should be continued, but some other classes of medications such as ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers should be stopped because of the risk for fetal loss and birth defects. Effort should be made to minimize cardiovascular stress through pregnancy and delivery. Cardiovascular imaging with echocardiography should be performed every two to three months during pregnancy to monitor aortic root size and growth. Monitoring should continue in the immediate postpartum period due to an increased risk for aortic dissection. The choice between a controlled vaginal delivery and cesarean section remains controversial.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Studies in animal models of Marfan syndrome have demonstrated excessive activation of and signaling by the growth factor TGFβ. Systemic administration of TGFβ antagonists can attenuate or prevent many disease manifestations in fibrillin-1-deficient mice including emphysema, skeletal muscle myopathy, myxomatous valve disease, and aortic aneurysm. Losartan, an angiotensin II type 1 receptor blocker, can also decrease TGFβ signaling. Losartan has shown the ability to halt abnormal aortic root growth in mouse models of Marfan syndrome [Habashi et al 2006]. This effect associates with both a reduction in hemodynamic stress and antagonism of TGFβ signaling in the vessel wall. A small observational study of losartan in children with severe Marfan syndrome showed a reduction in aortic root growth with the combination of beta blockers and losartan, when compared to prior medical monotherapy including both beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors [Brooke et al 2008]. Subsequently, multiple prospective trials have shown that the combination of beta blockers and losartan affords better protection against aortic root enlargement than beta blockers alone in both children and adults with Marfan syndrome [Chiu et al 2013, Groenink et al 2013, Pees et al 2013]. A large multicenter clinical trial of losartan versus atenolol in Marfan syndrome is ongoing in the United States [Lacro et al 2007]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.