

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with MBD5 haploinsufficiency, the following evaluations are recommended: Physical and neurologic examination Developmental assessment including assessment by a physical therapist and/or occupational therapist Speech evaluation including feeding evaluation and nutrition consultation as needed Hearing assessment (as part of the routine evaluation of children with speech delay) EEG if seizures are suspected Cardiac evaluation Sleep history Behavioral assessment Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 A multidisciplinary approach to manage the features and specific issues identified is recommended. Specialists in the following fields are often involved: clinical genetics, neurology, child development, behavioral therapy, nutrition/feeding, speech and language therapy, and occupational and physical therapy. 
            Neurologic
           Infants benefit from enrollment in an early-intervention program. School-age children benefit from an individualized educational program. Speech therapy with early introduction of nonverbal methods of communication (e.g., sign language and computer-assisted technologies) is appropriate given the high risk for poor or absent speech. Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as valproate, clonazepam, zonisamide and clobazam appear to be effective in reducing the incidence of seizures [Jaillard et al 2009, van Bon et al 2010, Williams et al 2010, Chung et al 2011, Talkowski et al 2011, Motobayashi et al 2012, Noh & Graham 2012, Bonnet et al 2013, Hodge et al 2014]. No information is available on response to specific AEDs. 
            Behavior
           Routine management of behavioral issues associated with severe intellectual disability and/or autism spectrum disorder is indicated. Management of sleep disturbance through a combined approach of targeted sleep hygiene (to develop firm daily schedules) and use of daily medications such as melatonin, clonidine, and trazadone may be considered [Mullegama et al 2015b]. Routine management is necessary for constipation (which can affect behavior).

Surveillance

 Appropriate surveillance includes: Periodic neurodevelopmental and behavioral evaluations to assist in the management of cognitive and behavioral problems; Periodic reevaluations by a clinical geneticist to provide new recommendations and information regarding MBD5 haploinsufficiency.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.