http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mcad

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an asymptomatic individual diagnosed with medium-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended: Plasma acylcarnitine analysis Plasma free and total carnitine measurement Urine acylglycine analysis Urine organic acid analysis MCAD activity assay in leukocytes (where available) In a symptomatic individual diagnosed with MCAD deficiency the following additional laboratory studies should be considered: Blood glucose concentration Blood gas analysis Ammonia Lactic acid CBC with differential Electrolytes Liver function tests Blood cultures (in case of fever) Although development is typically normal for individuals treated prospectively, those who experience metabolic decompensations requiring hospitalization often demonstrate developmental and neurologic disabilities. Neurodevelopmental assessments and intervention should therefore be considered for such individuals [Derks et al 2006].

Treatment of Manifestations

 The most important aspect of treating symptomatic patients is reversal of catabolism and sustained anabolism by provision of simple carbohydrates by mouth (for example, glucose tablets, or sweetened, non-diet beverages) or IV if the patient is unable or unlikely to maintain or achieve anabolism through oral intake of food and fluids. IV administration of glucose should then be initiated immediately with a bolus of 2 mL/kg 25% dextrose, followed by 10% dextrose with appropriate electrolytes at a rate of 10-12 mg glucose/kg/minute and to achieve/maintain a blood glucose level higher than 5 mmol/L [Saudubray et al 1999]. All affected individuals should have a frequently updated "emergency" letter to be given, if needed, to health care providers who may not be familiar with MCAD deficiency. This letter should include a detailed explanation of the management of acute metabolic decompensation, emphasizing the importance of preventive measures (e.g., intravenous glucose regardless of "normal" laboratory results, overnight in-hospital observation), and the telephone numbers of the individual's metabolic specialist.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 The mainstay in the treatment of MCAD deficiency is avoidance of fasting. Derks et al [2007] studied the length of time that MCAD-deficient but asymptomatic individuals should be able to fast. Based on their findings, they recommend maximum fasting times of: Up to eight hours in infants between ages six and 12 months Up to ten hours during the second year of life Up to 12 hours after age two years To avoid excessive fasting: Infants require frequent feedings. Toddlers could receive 2 g/kg of uncooked cornstarch as a source of complex carbohydrates at bedtime to ensure sufficient glucose supply overnight. A relatively low-fat diet (e.g., <30% of total energy from fat) may be beneficial. Additional consideration of the patient’s MCAD enzyme activity led Derks et al [2007] to suggest that when residual MCAD enzyme activity in leukocytes is greater than 10% of normal, prevention of fasting is not necessary for otherwise healthy individuals older than age six months [Touw et al 2013]. However, Sturm et al [2012] consider that residual MCAD enzyme activity lower than 30% requires treatment and follow up. Whether possible variability in MCAD enzyme activity assays plays a role in these different assessments is uncertain.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Recent long-term outcome studies revealed that persons treated for MCAD deficiency are prone to excessive weight gain [Derks et al 2006]. Accordingly, follow up should include weight control measures such as regular education about proper nutrition and allowed physical exercise.

Surveillance

 A metabolic specialist should be consulted immediately during intercurrent illness, especially when it involves fever and/or poor calorie in-/uptake. During the first months of life, monthly visits should be considered to ensure that families understand and are comfortable with treatment while the infant is otherwise well. A dietician should be involved to ensure proper nutrition in terms of quality and quantity. The frequency of routine follow-up visits is individualized based on comfort level of the patients, families, and health care providers.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Hypoglycemia must be avoided by frequent feedings to avoid catabolism, if necessary by intravenous administration of glucose. Infant formulas containing medium-chain triglycerides as the primary source of fat are contraindicated in MCAD deficiency. Alcohol consumption, in particular acute alcohol intoxication (e.g., binge drinking), often elicits a metabolic decompensation in individuals with MCAD deficiency [Lang 2009].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs and parents of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures [Leydiker et al 2011]. If the ACADM pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. If the ACADM pathogenic variants in the family are not known, plasma acylcarnitine and urine acylglycine analysis can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk sibs. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnant women who have MCAD deficiency must avoid catabolism. This is supported by several case reports describing carnitine deficiency, acute liver failure, and HELLP syndrome in pregnant women with MCAD deficiency [Nelson et al 2000, Santos et al 2007, Leydiker et al 2011].

Therapies Under Investigation

 The need for reduction of dietary fat to less than 20% of total calories and the need for L-carnitine supplementation or increase of the L-carnitine dose during metabolic stress are controversial. Several authors recommend oral supplementation with 100 mg/kg/day of carnitine to correct the frequently observed secondary carnitine deficiency and to enhance the elimination of toxic metabolites [Roe & Ding 2001]. Two exercise studies of persons with MCAD deficiency before and after L-carnitine supplementation suggested improved exercise tolerance with supplementation of 100 mg/kg/day [Lee et al 2005] and statistically insignificant benefit with supplementation of 50 mg/kg/day [Huidekoper et al 2006]. More recently, low-intensity exercise for one hour on a cycle ergometer showed reduced fatty acid oxidation rates in patients vs. controls that were not improved by carnitine administration (100 mg/kg/day), while carnitine concentrations in muscle and plasma increased among those receiving carnitine supplementation [Madsen et al 2013]. Carnitine-mediated detoxification of medium-chain fatty acids, assessed by urinary excretion of medium-chain acylcarnitines, is quantitatively negligible in individuals who are MCAD deficient [Rinaldo et al 1993]; carnitine supplementation does not under controlled circumstances improve the response to a fasting challenge [Treem et al 1989]. Note: The cost of long-term supplementation with carnitine could be significant. Furthermore, while no severe untoward effects of L-carnitine have been reported in individuals with MCAD deficiency [Potter et al 2012], some patients have complained about nausea, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and a fishy odor when treated with 100 mg/kg/day of L-carnitine [Madsen et al 2013]. Gene therapy has been suggested; however, aside from promising studies in fibroblast cultures of a patient with MCAD deficiency gene therapy has not been attempted in vivo [Schowalter et al 2005]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.