

Management

 Note: Linked pdfs included in the Management section are from Boyce & Collins [2012].

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 

 After the initial diagnosis, all individuals with fibrous dysplasia/McCune-Albright syndrome (FD/MAS) should be evaluated to determine the extent of disease. The authors recommend the following studies: Skeleton FD evaluation. See Fibrous Dysplasia Evaluation (pdf). Total body bone scintigraphy to identify and determine the extent of FD [Collins et al 2005]. The majority of clinically significant skeletal lesions are apparent on bone scan by age five years. Imaging of areas of FD identified with bone scintigraphy with radiographs (axial and appendicular FD) and/or computed tomography (craniofacial FD) to more clearly evaluate the extent and anatomy of the lesions Baseline ophthalmologic, otolaryngologic, and audiologic evaluations in persons with craniofacial FD 
            Endocrine In individuals with clinical signs or a previous history of precocious puberty: biochemical screening, pelvic ultrasound examination (females), and bone age examination. See Gonadal Evaluation in Girls (pdf). Ultrasound examination of the testes (in all males) to evaluate for subclinical disease. See Gonadal Evaluation in Boys (pdf). Growth hormone excess evaluation (pdf) A thorough history and physical examination and review of a growth chart (if available) to evaluate for clinical signs of endocrinopathies Biochemical screening for hyperthyroidism, growth hormone excess (IGF-1 level), and FGF23-mediated hypophosphatemia Ultrasound examination of the thyroid gland to evaluate for subclinical disease. See Thyroid Evaluation (pdf). Adrenal evaluation (pdf) Less common manifestations. Consideration should be given to the less common manifestations cited in Clinical Description with appropriate clinical evaluations and imaging/biochemical studies performed as indicated. See Gastrointestinal Evaluation (pdf).

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management is most effectively accomplished through the input of a multidisciplinary team of specialists including an endocrinologist, orthopedic surgeon, physiatrist, ophthalmologist, audiologist, endocrine surgeon, craniofacial surgeon, and medical geneticist.

Fibrous Dysplasia

 There are no available medical therapies capable of altering the disease course in fibrous dysplasia. Current management is focused on optimizing function and minimizing morbidity related to fractures and deformity. The primary elements of management include the following. See Fibrous Dysplasia Management (pdf): Orthopedic surgery to repair fractures and to prevent and correct deformities. A surgeon experienced in FD should be consulted, as approaches previously considered “standard,” (e.g., curettage, grafting, and external fixation) are frequently ineffective [Stanton et al 2012]. Diagnosis and treatment of scoliosis is of particular importance, as it may be rapidly progressive and in rare cases may lead to fatal respiratory compromise. For this reason all individuals with spinal FD should be monitored closely by an orthopedic surgeon or physiatrist for possible progression. Surgical fusion has been shown to be effective at stabilizing the spine [Leet et al 2004b, Mancini et al 2009]. Aneurysmal bone cysts, best detected by MRI, are rapidly expanding fluid-filled lesions that form within preexisting areas of FD. Patients experience acute onset of severe pain, rapidly expanding localized deformity, and rarely – when cysts compress the optic nerve – sudden loss of vision. Aneurysmal bone cysts thus carry a high risk of morbidity and should be evaluated urgently by a surgeon [Lee et al 2012, Manjila et al 2013]. Prophylactic optic nerve decompression to reduce the risk of vision loss can in fact increase the risk of vision loss and is thus contraindicated [Lee et al 2002, Cutler et al 2006, Amit et al 2011]. Physical therapy to optimize function and attenuate loss of mobility is appropriate. Patients with lower-extremity FD in particular may benefit from therapies to address hip girdle weakness, range of motion, and leg length discrepancies [Paul et al 2014]. Intravenous bisphosphonates such as zoledronic acid and pamidronate are usually effective at relieving bone pain. Dosing should be based on symptoms, not on a fixed interval or bone turnover markers. Note: The oral bisphosphonate alendronate has been shown to be ineffective for treatment of bone pain [Boyce et al 2014]. Malignancy should remain a consideration for individuals with acute or rapidly expanding FD lesions, or with atypical radiographic features such as compromise of the bony cortex with an associated soft tissue mass.

Endocrinopathies 

 Precocious puberty. Treatment of precocious puberty is important to prevent bone age advancement and compromise of adult height. Effective treatment options for girls include the aromatase inhibitor letrozole [Feuillan et al 2007] and/or the estrogen receptor modulator tamoxifen [Eugster et al 2003]. See Precocious Puberty Management in Girls (pdf). The primary clinical endpoints are prevention of growth acceleration and bone age advancement. Most girls will also have a decrease in the number of menstrual bleeding episodes while on treatment. Note: Prophylactic surgical intervention for large and persistent ovarian cysts should be undertaken with extreme caution due to the known risks of recurrent cysts and the potential for decreased ovarian reserve in affected women. Given the rarity of precocious puberty in males, treatment options are less well established. See Gonadal Involvement Management in Boys (pdf). One strategy includes the combination of an androgen receptor blocker (e.g., spironolactone or flutamide) and an inhibitor of sex steroid synthesis (e.g., letrozole) [Boyce et al 2012]. Children of both sexes frequently enter central precocious puberty due to premature sex steroid exposure (see Clinical Description). This typically presents with reappearance of signs of puberty in a child with previously well-controlled peripheral precocious puberty. Leuprolide therapy in combination with the above medications is an effective therapeutic strategy in most. Thyroid disease. See Hyperthyroidism Management (pdf). Methimazole is effective for management of hyperthyroidism. However, because FD/MAS-associated hyperthyroidism is persistent, most patients ultimately elect for definitive treatment. Thyroidectomy is the preferred definitive treatment in most affected individuals. Total gland resection is generally recommended due to the potential for thyroid tissue regrowth. Selection of an experienced high-volume endocrine surgeon is critical to minimize complications and optimize outcomes. Patients should be monitored post-surgically with yearly ultrasound examination to evaluate for tissue regrowth. Note: Radioablation is typically avoided due to potential preferential uptake by areas of mutation-bearing tissue, which may lead to increased risk of malignancy in the remaining unaffected gland. Additionally, GNAS mutations are associated with a slight increased risk of malignant transformation in both thyroid and non-thyroidal tissues; the risk may potentially be enhanced by radiation exposure. Growth hormone (GH) excess. See GH Excess: Management (pdf). Medical therapy is the preferred first-line treatment. Options include (alone or in combination) octreotide and the growth hormone receptor antagonist pegvisomant [Boyce et al 2013, Salenave et al 2014]. In growing children, the therapeutic goal is to maintain the IGF-1 level in the middle of the normal range with an IGF-1 Z-score of 0. In skeletally mature individuals, the goal is to decrease the IGF-1 level as low as possible. Medical therapy is typically continued indefinitely, because options for definitive treatment are associated with significant morbidity. Surgery may be technically difficult or precluded due to craniofacial FD. Additionally, given the diffuse pituitary infiltration of GH-producing cells, patients treated surgically require total hypophysectomy with resulting total hypopituitarism [Vortmeyer et al 2012]. Radiation treatment may be effective in refractory cases, but has been associated with fatal malignant transformation of craniofacial FD [Hansen & Moffat 2003, Liu et al 2011]. The hyperprolactinemia that frequently accompanies growth hormone excess is generally responsive to treatment with dopamine agonists, including cabergoline and bromocriptine. FGF23-mediated phosphate wasting. Treatment of frank hypophosphatemia is the same as in other disorders of FGF23 excess, and includes oral phosphorus and calcitriol. Important therapeutic endpoints include growth velocity and radiographic evidence of epiphyseal healing. Unlike other disorders of FGF23 excess, bone turnover markers in FD/MAS (e.g., alkaline phosphatase) may be constitutively elevated and are not a useful indicator of skeletal response to treatment. Hypercortisolism. Treatment guidelines for hypercortisolism are difficult to establish given the rarity of neonatal Cushing syndrome. Additionally patients may be critically ill at presentation, which significantly affects treatment options. See Hypercortisolism Management (pdf). Definitive treatment includes surgical removal of the diseased adrenal glands. For medical treatment metyrapone is frequently effective, and is preferred over ketoconazole in children with liver abnormalities. Spontaneous remission has been clearly documented in some affected individuals [Brown et al 2010]; however, it is not possible to identify prospectively which individuals will undergo remission. The decision to pursue or delay adrenalectomy must be made on an individual basis, taking into account the severity of illness, the ability of medications to control cortisol levels, and the potential effect of continued hypercortisolism on neurodevelopment.

Surveillance



Fibrous Dysplasia

 Individuals with craniofacial FD should have yearly vision and hearing evaluations, and periodic computed tomography of the skull. Individuals with spine FD should be monitored closely for progressive scoliosis. Radiographs should be performed periodically to evaluate new or worsening symptoms and to provide additional information about FD anatomy and bone quality. Phosphorus levels should be checked periodically to monitor for the development of FGF23-mediated hypophosphatemia. 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels should be checked periodically as part of routine bone health surveillance.

Endocrinopathies

 Precocious puberty. All children should be monitored for growth acceleration and other clinical signs of precocious puberty. 
              Thyroid Thyroid function tests should be monitored routinely in all children younger than age five years. See Thyroid Evaluation. Individuals with abnormalities on ultrasound examination but normal thyroid function tests should continue to have laboratory testing periodically throughout childhood, as the development of frank hyperthyroidism may occur later. See Thyroid Evaluation. Patients who retain abnormal thyroid tissue following thyroid surgery should be monitored with regular physical examination and periodic thyroid ultrasound examination because of the potential for thyroid tissue regrowth. Testicular lesions likely have low potential for malignant transformation [Boyce et al 2012]; however, it is prudent to monitor all males with regular physical examinations and testicular ultrasound examinations. See Gonadal Involvement Management in Boys. Growth hormone excess. See Growth Hormone Excess Evaluation: All children should be monitored for growth acceleration. Patients treated medically with octreotide should be monitored for gallbladder disease, and with those treated with pegvisomant should be monitored for hepatotoxicity. FGF23-mediated phosphate wasting. Serum phosphorus levels should be monitored routinely in all patients. 
              Hypercortisolism Routine biochemical surveillance is not indicated; however, all infants should be monitored for clinical signs of hypercortisolism. Patients with a history of Cushing syndrome that has spontaneously resolved should be monitored for late-appearing adrenal insufficiency.

Other

 GI. See Gastrointestinal Management (pdf).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Contact sports and other high-risk activities should be avoided in patients with significant skeletal involvement. Prophylactic optic nerve decompression increases vision loss in patients with craniofacial FD and is contraindicated [Lee et al 2002, Amit et al 2011]. Surgical removal of ovarian cysts should be performed with caution and only in limited circumstances. Radiation therapy is not indicated for treatment of FD, and radiation exposure to FD lesions should be limited due to potential risk for malignant transformation [Ruggieri et al 1994]. While a strong association between gsp mutations (i.e., activating GNAS mutations at residues Arg201 and Gln227) and malignancies in FD/MAS is lacking, it is prudent to minimize additional risk factors (e.g., radiation exposure) and encourage vigilance and monitoring.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Because FD/MAS is not inherited, relatives are not at increased risk and do not require evaluation. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

 Although the effects of pregnancy on bone and endocrine disease in women with FD/MAS are not well studied, in the authors’ experience most women do not experience a worsening of disease during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.