http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mcleod

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome (MLS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic and neuropsychological examination

Serum CK concentration and liver function tests

Cardiac examination, including ECG, Holter ECG, and echocardiography

Cerebral MRI and electroencephalography

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



The following are indicated:

Dopamine antagonists including tiapride, clozapine, or quetiapine, as well as dopamine depletor tetrabenazine to ameliorate chorea

Treatment of psychiatric problems according to the clinical presentation

Treatment of cardiac abnormalities according to the clinical and/or ECG presentation

Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) for treatment of seizures

Extended and continuous multidisciplinary psychosocial support for affected individuals and their families

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Transfusion hazards secondary to anti-Kx antibody production resulting from previous exposure to Kx antigens during homologous blood transfusion must be considered in:

All males with the McLeod blood group phenotype [Russo et al 2000b], in particular males with X-linked chronic granulomatous disease resulting from a contiguous gene deletion of CYBB and XK (see Diagnosis, Contiguous Gene Rearrangements) [Holland 2005]; and

Carrier females with the McLeod blood group phenotype.

Kx-negative blood or, if possible, banked autologous blood should be used for transfusions.

Surveillance



Early recognition and treatment of cardiac problems and seizures is important, as these potential complications may be severe and appear to cause premature death [Danek et al 2001a].

If no pathologic findings are identified at initial evaluation, cardiac examinations (Holter ECG and echocardiography) should be repeated every two to three years.

In the case of suspected epilepsy, EEG should be performed. If AED treatment is indicated, medication-specific laboratory parameters and serum concentrations should be followed.

One individual with MLS developed life-threatening rhabdomyolysis; thus, serum CK concentrations should be carefully monitored, in particular if excessive movement disorders are present or if neuroleptic medications are being used [Jung & Brandner 2002].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Blood transfusions with Kx antigens should be avoided in males and females with the McLeod blood group phenotype. Kx-negative blood or, if possible, banked autologous blood should be used for transfusions.

Treatment with neuroleptics, in particular clozapine, should be carefully monitored.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



In female heterozygotes, the probability of manifestations of the McLeod neuroacanthocytosis syndrome in the reproductive period is presumably very low; thus, no particular recommendations can be made. Of note, transfusion reactions have to be considered in female carriers who have the McLeod blood group phenotype (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

No prenatal or perinatal neurologic manifestations of MLS are known; however, severe anemia can be observed in Kell-positive newborns born to sensitized Kell-negative mothers [Lee et al 2000b, Jung et al 2007].

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.