

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of a child diagnosed with LAMA2-related muscular dystrophy following the initial diagnosis, the following are recommended: Assessment of feeding, nutrition, and bone health: measurement of weight and serum concentrations of vitamin D and calcium Systematic inquiry of parents/caregivers regarding digestive complications, in particular dysphagia, GE-reflux, and constipation. Frequent choking, prolonged feeding, and nocturnal cough may identify swallowing and gastroesophageal disorders. Additional assessment may include endoscopy, manometry, PH-meter studies, and videofluoroscopy. Lung function tests that ideally include spirometry (forced vital capacity, forced expired volume in the first second [FEV-1]) and assessment of cough effectiveness (cough peak flow and maximum inspiratory and expiratory pressures) Evaluate older children with an FVC lower than 60% of the predicted value with polysomnography or, if polysomnography is not routinely performed, overnight oximetry. In those using orthopedic trunk braces or orthoses, assess pulmonary function with and without the brace to determine whether thoracic excursion (and thus ventilator function) is impaired. Evaluation for nocturnal hypoventilation in children with a history of recurrent respiratory infections, failure to thrive, poor cry, and/or feeding fatigue Physical therapy assessment of muscle strength and joint mobility Assessment of the spine by an orthopedist regarding the need for early bracing Evaluation by a child neurologist for seizures or unexplained fainting or loss of consciousness. Developmental assessment Neuropsychological testing if learning or behavioral deficiencies are identified Evaluation by a cardiologist including electrocardiogram and echocardiogram Evaluation of respite care services for caregivers Educational planning to place the child with necessary support in the least restrictive educational environment

Treatment of Manifestations



Early-Onset 

 Nutrition/weight. In the absence of evidence-based target BMI or weight charts, the recommendation is to weigh the child serially and assess the frequency of chest infections and hospitalizations. Weight needs to increase annually by small increments. Since these children are usually non-ambulatory and muscular mass is reduced, normalization of weight to standard weights is not the goal. In contrast, excess weight may contribute to reduced motor function, resulting in increased respiratory dysfunction. If weight plateaus or decreases, assessment of nutrition and diet, speech and swallowing, and respiratory function by a multidisciplinary team of specialists is recommended: The patient or caregiver may need to be prompted to recall dietary concerns including lengthy meal times, limited food intake, and/or significant constipation [Philpot et al 1999a]. Non-ambulant school-age children (because they require assistance to use the restroom) may consciously restrict liquid intake. Limited hydration, choice of diet, and lack of movement may all contribute to constipation, leading to further restriction of oral intake. The nutritionist can review dietary fiber, total liquid consumption, and the need for laxatives (e.g., Miralax®, macromolecules FORLAX®) to optimize caloric intake during periods of growth. If weight continues to decline, respiratory assessment to evaluate for pulmonary infection is indicated. Adequate weight gain may be achieved by increasing the caloric content of formulas in infants and by supplementary hypercaloric protein drinks in older children. Infants with persistently poor weight gain and frequent pulmonary infections should be referred to a gastroenterologist: Gastroesophageal reflux is treated as needed. A nasogastric tube or percutaneous gastrostomy may help avoid aspiration pneumonia and improve nutritional status. Failure to thrive may require supplemental feeding and gastrostomy with or without Nissen fundoplication [Philpot et al 1999a]. Children with poor intake or vomiting may require enteral feeding or intravenous fluid therapy to avoid hypoglycemia and metabolic decompensation. Calcium and vitamin D supplementation is recommended to support bone growth and strength and to prevent future osteopenia. Respiratory function testing. Training five year olds to perform spirometry during regular clinic visits may allow them to become adept at performing pulmonary function tests by age six years. (Note: A training effect may lead to an initial improvement in spirometric values.) For those who cannot use a standard mouth piece due to facial weakness, a buco-nasal mask adapter or scuba mouth piece can be used. Pulmonary function tests ideally include spirometry (forced vital capacity [FVC], forced expired volume in the first second [FEV-1]) and measures of cough effectiveness (cough peak flow and maximum inspiratory and expiratory pressures). Note: In those using orthopedic trunk braces or orthoses, assess pulmonary function with and without the brace to determine if thoracic excursion is impaired. An FVC less than 60% of the predicted value has been associated with sleep-disordered breathing; an FVC less than 40% of predicted has been associated with high risk for nocturnal hypoventilation [Mellies et al 2003]. Those with an FVC less than 60% of predicted or clinical evidence of disordered sleep (daytime somnolence, morning headaches, hypercarbia) should undergo an overnight sleep study (polysomnogram) to evaluate for night-time hypoventilation, hypercapnia, and obstructive sleep apnea. Those with an FVC less than 60% of predicted and hypercapnia, hypoxemia, and/or significant aspiration of food or refluxed gastric contents should be referred to a pulmonologist. Assessment of hypoventilation, night-time and daytime hypercapnea is indicated in children with signs of sleep-related difficulties (e.g., morning headaches, attention difficulties, hypersomnolence, increased fatigue), weight loss, recurrent pulmonary infections, a weak cry, and/or FVC less than 60% of predicted. Because early respiratory insufficiency may not be detected by diurnal tests, polysomnography (including end-tidal CO2 measurements) can be used to evaluate for nocturnal hypoventilation and other sleep-related breathing difficulties, such as apnea (both obstructive and central) and hypopnea, which are usually more pronounced during REM sleep. (The predominance of findings in REM sleep may be the result of diminished respiratory drive, atonia of the upper airway and intercostal muscles, and weakness of the diaphragm.) Assistance with coughing. Weak/ineffective cough can lead to progressive atelectasis, infection, and respiratory failure in those with diminished lung capacity. Daily intermittent positive pressure breathing (IPPB) may improve diminished compliance, peak cough flow, and ability to clear secretions. It has been shown to promote expansion of the thorax, prevent or treat atelectasis, and decrease the risk of lower-respiratory infections [Mellies et al 2005, Wang et al 2010]. Positive pressure breathing can be administered by IPPB or a mechanical in-exsufflator (Cough Assist), or attained through breath-stacking maneuvers using a bag valve mask. Patients with weak cough (low cough peak flow, maximum and inspiratory pressures <60 cm H2O, and FVCs <60% predicted) can benefit from use of positive pressure breathing once or twice a day and then as needed during respiratory infections. Night-time ventilator support once initiated also helps inflate the lungs, allowing for better tidal volume and ventilation, and thus preventing atelectasis. Because of abdominal muscle weakness and the need for high positive pressures, an abdominal belt can lead to better results, efficacy, and tolerance [Guérin et al 2010]. Noninvasive ventilation support is indicated in the setting of: Daytime hypercapnea and/or nocturnal hypoventilation Evidence on polysomnogram of sleep-disordered breathing (even without hypoventilation) Recurrent chest infections or atelectasis (in the absence of either daytime hypercapnea or nocturnal hypoventilation) in infants and toddlers [SJ Quijano-Roy, personal communication] Noninvasive ventilator interfaces include nasal pillows, nasal masks, and full face masks, all of which come with head gear. Of note, it is difficult to fit masks to infants; toddlers often fight the masks. In children, alternating mask interfaces is recommended to prevent the progressive under-bite and midface hypoplasia that result from the bone remodeling associated with long-term use of nasal masks from an early age. Although the nasal mask causes more bite and mid-face problems than does the full face mask, the full face mask should be used with caution because of the risk of suffocation in a child who vomits into the mask and is unable to remove it. In patients with severe lordosis/scoliosis and chronic cough or recurrent infections, chest CT may be needed to evaluate for chronic atelectasis and airway compression by the vertebral bodies During adolescence ventilatory support is often only needed during sleep with noninvasive pressure support. Assessment of daytime hypercapnea is needed beginning in late adolescence or if patient experiences increasing fatigue, chest infections, or failure to thrive. If daytime ventilation is required, ventilation via tracheostomy may be indicated. Joint contractures. Physical therapy including daily stander placement, stretching activities, and pool (swimming) therapy can assist in maintenance of some range of motion. Splints, orthoses, and night positioning by casts are used to prevent progression of joint deformities. Non-ambulant children require standing frames for postural support. Durable medical equipment support including power wheelchair fitting is essential for non-ambulant toddlers. Scoliosis may need orthopedic and surgical treatment [Bentley et al 2001]. When needed, specific trunk orthotics or braces that do not restrict the thorax either through compression or limitation of thoracic movements are recommended [Wang et al 2010]. Their use may improve upright posture and delay spinal fusion until early puberty, providing that bracing does not interfere with respiration by causing chest compression [Wang et al 2010]. If cervical lordosis progresses in late adolescence, posterior head support (using trunk braces or wheelchair supports) can prevent neck hyperextension. Cardiomyopathy. Right heart failure due to respiratory insufficiency requires adequate mechanical ventilation. Primary left heart failure or rhythm disturbances require typical age-appropriate treatment. Seizures are generally well controlled with routine administration of antiepileptic drugs. Refractory seizures in those with cortical dysplasia may require polytherapy. Developmental delay/cognitive impairment. Early intervention with physical, occupational, and speech therapy along with a multidisciplinary medical team provide the best possible outcome. Other. Surgery to correct facial function and address cosmetic concerns has been performed [Jones & Waite 2012].

Late-Onset 

 These patients need mainly respiratory and orthopedic care due to the risk of progressive respiratory insufficiency and joint and spinal deformities. Regular physical therapy for stretching limbs, shoulder and pelvic girdle, and spine is mandatory. Antiepileptic drugs should be used to treat seizures.

Surveillance

 Standards of care have been reviewed recently [Wang et al 2010] (full text). 
            Early-onset LAMA2 MD At least biannual evaluations during the first five years by a nutritionist and gastroenterologist to monitor weight gain and to identify early recurrent aspiration At least annual follow up with a pulmonologist to assess respiratory function. After age four to six years: annual pulmonary function testing including assessment of forced vital capacity (FVC). Annual measurement of FVC to allow trending of FVC Annual evaluation of strength and joint range of motion by a physical therapist At least annual evaluation of the spine by an orthopedist. Note: (1) More frequent evaluations are warranted during periods of rapid growth, loss of function, and/or progression of deformities. (2) Annual lateral spinal x-rays (in addition to the standard anterior-posterior x-rays) can be used to evaluate the anterior posterior intra-thoracic cavity diameter; however, if respiratory function declines rapidly without known cause or without prior spinal surgery, a CT may be needed. Cardiac monitoring: In the absence of symptoms, evaluation by a cardiologist including electrocardiogram and echocardiogram at age five years, ten years, and then every two years In patients with severe respiratory insufficiency on mechanical ventilation, annual echocardiography (required) In patients reporting palpitations, increased fatigue, or loss of consciousness without a clear neurologic origin, cardiac evaluation including Holter monitor and echocardiogram (recommended) Pre-surgical cardiac evaluation including Holter monitor, echocardiogram, and a dopamine test of cardiac function Note: The brain MRI findings seen in both complete and partial laminin α2 deficiency do not need to be followed with serial scans over time [Geranmayeh et al 2010]. 
            Late-onset LAMA2 MD Respiratory. Monitor for respiratory insufficiency with serial pulmonary function tests. Orthopedic. Monitor with frequent spinal examinations to detect scoliosis and assess bone health. Neurologic. Monitor to detect and treat seizures.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Succinylcholine in induction of anesthesia because of risk of hyperkalemia and cardiac conduction abnormalities Statin, cholesterol lowering medication, because of the risk of muscle damage

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 LAMA2-related muscular dystrophy leads to a primary deficiency of the protein laminin α2 in the extracellular matrix of muscle, precipitating several downstream effects including: increased inflammation, increased fibrosis, increased apoptosis, and decreased regeneration. Several therapies have recently been tested in murine models that replicate disease pathogenesis (including the dyw and dy3k [neo cassettes in LAMA2] and dy2j [a spontaneously occurring pathogenic variant]). Current efforts to define standard operating protocols led by TREAT-NMD, a panel of international scientists and Cure CMD, have been posted at curecmd.org. Therapies currently under investigation target apoptosis with drugs such as omigapil [Erb et al 2009] and doxycycline [Girgenrath et al 2009], and genetic manipulation of BAX [Girgenrath et al 2004]. Additional approaches include protein replacement therapy using miniagrin constructs and pro-regenerative approaches using IgF [Kumar et al 2011]. Another approach for the treatment of genetic disorders caused by premature termination codons is the use of drugs to force stop codon read-through [Allamand et al 2008]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.