http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mdel16p12_2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with the 16p12.2 microdeletion, the following evaluations are recommended: Clinical genetics consultation Measurement of height and weight Broad review of all organ systems Developmental assessment with cognitive and behavioral testing To consider: Consultation with a neurologist and EEG testing if history suggests the possibility of seizures Evaluation and echocardiogram by a cardiologist

Treatment of Manifestations

Because manifestations of 16p12.2 microdeletion are variable, treatment should be targeted to the specific problems identified. Early diagnosis and treatment facilitate the best outcome. Referral to other appropriate medical specialists is recommended based on specific signs and symptoms. Specialists may include a developmental/behavioral pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, and/or medical geneticist. Developmental and cognitive delays. Initiate developmental therapies promptly when indicated. Cognitive testing in older children may help identify any specific learning or cognitive disabilities that could be addressed by therapies or specialized education plans. Cardiac malformations. Individuals with 16p12.2 microdeletion and cardiac malformations should have standard treatment for the malformation, including surgical correction and prophylactic antibiotic treatments as indicated. Epilepsy. A history suggestive of possible seizure activity should prompt referral to a neurologist for additional testing, including brain imaging and EEG, and consideration of medical intervention. Psychiatric and/or behavior problems. In individuals of any age, signs of psychiatric or behavioral problems should prompt referral to specialists, including developmental/behavioral pediatricians, psychologists, or psychiatrists, so that formal assessments may be performed and appropriate interventions (medical, social, behavioral, and/or educational) may be made. Hearing loss. Standard treatment should be provided for hearing loss. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness. Other malformations. Standard treatment should be provided for any other malformations, including oro-facial clefting and renal, genitourinary, or dental anomalies.

Surveillance

Periodic: Developmental evaluations because of the increased incidence of developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders, and other behavioral features Monitoring of cardiac, renal, urologic, and/or dental abnormalities, as needed Reevaluation by a medical geneticist who can apprise the family of new recommendations for monitoring for medical or mental health concerns.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.