

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with the 9q22.3 microdeletion, the following evaluations are recommended: Brain imaging (not using CT) and neurologic evaluation Complete physical examination, including dermatologic assessment for the manifestations of Gorlin syndrome Comprehensive developmental assessment Renal and pelvic ultrasound examination for evaluation of possible renal anomalies and ovarian fibromas Echocardiogram Ophthalmologic evaluation Careful consideration of skeletal and/or dental imaging for associated anomalies Familial genetic counseling Routine treatment and management by appropriate specialists for cardiac, neurologic, dermatologic findings Comprehensive physical, occupational, and speech therapy services as needed Surgical intervention as needed for excision or treatment of mandibular keratocysts, basal cell carcinomas, or other tumors that develop, or for management or correction of physical anomalies

Treatment of Manifestations

 The following are appropriate: Routine treatment and management by appropriate specialists for cardiac, neurologic, dermatologic findings Comprehensive physical, occupational, and speech therapy services as needed Surgical intervention as needed for excision or treatment of mandibular keratocysts, basal cell carcinomas, or other tumors that develop, or for management or correction of physical anomalies

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Avoidance of excessive sunlight or other ultraviolet radiation, and limiting exposure to ionizing radiation (e.g., by computed tomography and x-ray) is recommended because of the increased predisposition for the development of basal cell carcinomas.

Surveillance

 The following recommended surveillance is the same as that for Gorlin syndrome (see Gorlin Syndrome). Head circumference should be followed throughout childhood and plotted on appropriate growth charts. Rapid enlargement should prompt evaluation for possible hydrocephalus. Awareness of the risk of medulloblastoma in the first years of life is important and may justify developmental assessment and physical examination every six months. No evidence for the efficacy of regular neuroimaging exists; frequent computer tomography (CT) should be avoided because of risks associated with radiation sensitivity. Orthopantogram is indicated every 12-18 months in individuals older than age eight years to identify jaw keratocysts. Skin should be examined at least annually; some physicians recommend skin examination by a professional every three to four months. While there are currently no published guidelines regarding monitoring for intraabdominal embryonal tumors in individuals with 9q22.3 microdeletion, 12% of the published cases have been diagnosed with Wilms tumor. Thus regular abdominal ultrasound for Wilms tumor, similar to surveillance for Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, is recommended for individuals with 9q22.3 microdeletion until disproven otherwise.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 As all individuals to date have had involvement of PTCH1 resulting in Gorlin syndrome, affected individuals are at increased risk for malignant tumor formation with ionizing and ultraviolet radiation exposure, and for spontaneous development of basal cell carcinomas both from the numerous existing basal cell nevi and in apparently unaffected skin (see Gorlin Syndrome). Radiographs and computed tomography should be used sparingly, and the benefit versus risk to the individual’s health should be carefully considered. Liberal use of topical sunblock and avoidance of excessive exposure to sunlight are warranted.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

 Macrosomia and/or macrocephaly of prenatal onset is present in many individuals with 9q22.3 microdeletion. This may necessitate delivery by Cesarean section, including emergently, as has been reported for some individuals [Isidor et al 2013].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.