http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mdel15q13_3

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with the 15q13.3 microdeletion, the following evaluations are recommended: General clinical examination Cognitive assessment including speech assessment Neuropsychological and developmental evaluation by a clinical psychologist to help determine needs for subsequent treatment EEG and neurologic examination if epilepsy is suspected Cardiac ultrasound evaluation Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Ideally treatment is tailored to the specific needs of the individual. Because of the high incidence of neurodevelopmental disability, referral to a clinical psychologist for neuropsychological and/or developmental assessment for treatment recommendations is suggested. Medical treatment for persons with cardiac defects, epilepsy, autism spectrum disorders, and schizophrenia should follow standard practice for these disorders, considering the age of the patient and the specific manifestations. Additional management in healthy adults who have the 15q13.3 microdeletion is not necessary, although their medical care providers may benefit from being alerted to the possible increased risk for late-onset manifestations (e.g., schizophrenia).

Surveillance

 Close assessment/monitoring of neurocognitive development and developmental milestones are recommended during childhood for all children who have the 15q13.3 microdeletion, with referral to early intervention programs if required. Medical surveillance for persons with cardiac defects, epilepsy, autism spectrum disorders, and schizophrenia should follow standard practice for these disorders, considering the age of the patient and the specific manifestations.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 About 10% of the individuals with the 15q13.3 microdeletion develop schizophrenia. The use of cannabis has been reported as a risk factor for development of schizophrenia. Although no studies have been performed on the possible additional risk of the use of cannabis by persons with the 15q13.3 microdeletion, discouraging the use of cannabis may be considered.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Using genomic testing that will detect the 15q13.3 microdeletion found in the proband, it is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from close assessment/monitoring of developmental milestones in childhood. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.