http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mdel17q12

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with the 17q12 recurrent deletion syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Renal ultrasound examination; serum BUN, creatinine, electrolytes, calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, and uric acid; urine magnesium and creatinine; and consultation with a nephrologist Hemoglobin A1C and consultation with endocrinologist regarding possible evidence of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) Assessment of speech, cognitive development, motor development, and behavior Pelvic ultrasound examination and gynecologic examination in females to evaluate for possible müllerian abnormalities Liver function tests (AST, ALT, GGTP) Ophthalmologic examination Clinical assessment for congenital heart defects; consultation with a cardiologist and echocardiography if warranted Neurology consultation if seizure activity is suspected Audiologic screening Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment is symptomatic and depends on an individual’s specific needs. Renal disease. Treatment should follow standard practice. Established guidelines for the management of chronic kidney disease, including that related to CAKUT or ADTKD, are available for children and adults [KDIGO CKD Work Group 2013]. Some individuals have normal renal function, while others may progress to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and require dialysis or kidney transplantation. For those who have diabetes mellitus, simultaneous pancreas and kidney transplantation has been successful and should be considered [Faguer et al 2011, Halbritter et al 2011, Poitou et al 2012]. MODY5. Treatment should follow standard practice. The clinical course tends to be progressive in terms of hyperglycemia, requiring treatment with insulin [Fajans & Bell 2011]. Neurodevelopmental/neuropsychiatric disorders. Early identification and intervention for neurodevelopmental or neuropsychiatric disorders (e.g., global developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, schizophrenia, anxiety, and bipolar disorder) is important for optimal outcomes. Specialized instruction and speech / occupational / physical / behavioral therapies should be provided if indicated. Management of ASD should follow guidelines published by the American Academy of Pediatrics [Myers & Johnson 2007]. Psychiatric consultation and therapy is recommended for those with mental health concerns, such as mood disorders, anxiety, and/or psychosis. Other. Cardiac, ophthalmologic, neurologic, gastrointestinal, and other conditions should be treated by the appropriate specialty according to standard guidelines.

Surveillance

 
            Renal structure/function Renal ultrasound examination to monitor for kidney cysts 12 months after establishing the diagnosis, then every two to three years in childhood/adolescence and every three to five years in adulthood. If an abnormality is detected, more frequent ultrasound examinations may be warranted. Periodic monitoring of renal function; serum concentration of magnesium, potassium, uric acid; and possibly urine magnesium and creatinine, preferably under the guidance of a nephrologist. Annual or more frequent monitoring may be advised for patients who have laboratory findings suggesting renal impairment, are taking potentially nephrotoxic medications (e.g., nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), or have structural renal abnormalities [Verbitsky et al 2015] 
            MODY5 HgbA1C annually Patients and families should be educated on how to monitor for the clinical signs and symptoms of diabetes mellitus (e.g., polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss [sometimes with polyphagia], fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and blurred vision) in order to promote early diagnosis and treatment. Note: Endocrinology consultations as indicated depending on an individual’s clinical manifestations Psychomotor development. Routine monitoring through early childhood. A full neuropsychological evaluation is indicated for children who experience difficulty with school. Other. Audiologic and ophthalmological evaluations on a regular basis

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Individuals with HNF1B-associated renal disease, including the 17q12 recurrent deletion, who develop ESRD and require renal transplantation are at increased risk for developing new-onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT); therefore, use of an immunosuppressive regimen that avoids tacrolimus and reduces corticosteroid exposure may be beneficial for those who do not have preexisting diabetes [Zuber et al 2009, Faguer et al 2011, Clissold et al 2015].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 If genomic testing detects the 17q12 recurrent deletion in one of the proband’s parents, it is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of older and younger sibs of the proband and other relatives at risk in order to identify those who would benefit from close assessment/monitoring for evidence of renal structural or functional defects, maturity-onset diabetes of the young, and developmental delays/intellectual disability. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.