http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/me-ataxia

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with PRICKLE1-related progressive myoclonus epilepsy (PME) with ataxia, the following evaluations should be performed: Clinical evaluation Neurologic examination for evidence of ataxia, including speech, walking, coordination, and handwriting Evaluation of school performance and emotional status EEG Brain MRI Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment of epilepsy involves antiepileptic drugs including valproic acid, clonazepam, zonisamide, piracetam, and levetiracetam. Valproate was particularly helpful in one family [El-Shanti et al 2006]. Ataxia may require assistive devices or eventually wheelchair. Consultation with a speech pathologist may be helpful.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Valproate levels are affected by a number of drugs. Serum valproate concentration should be closely monitored to ensure proper levels. If consistent side effects such as nausea, vomiting, hair loss, or tremor are reported, consider switching to an extended-release formulation which allows for more stable serum levels.

Surveillance

 Follow-up evaluations should be performed every three to four months to ensure effective seizure control and monitor for changes in clinical findings.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Phenytoin [Eldridge et al 1983] Carbamezapine, oxycarbazepine [National Organization for Rare Disorders 1990]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures. If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.