http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mecp2-dup

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with MECP2 duplication syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended:

Review of medical history for developmental progress, seizures, and recurrent infections

Complete neurologic evaluation and EEG

Complete neuropsychological evaluation of intellectual level and behavioral problems

Assessment of feeding for swallowing difficulties in infants

Analysis of the family pedigree for other possible affected individuals and carrier females (see Genetic Counseling)

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Cognitive impairment. Developmental stimulation including speech therapy is appropriate.

Note: Because developmental outcome is variable, individual counseling is important.

Spastic paraplegia. Treatment is nonspecific; general guidelines can be followed.

Epilepsy. Seizures usually respond well to standard therapy with antiepileptic drugs; however, in some males seizures are resistant to the usual therapy, necessitating multi-drug therapy.

Predisposition to infections. Infections, especially of the respiratory tract, should be treated immediately with appropriate antibiotics. All vaccines should be given. If aspiration occurs, placement of a permanent gastrostomy should be considered.

Gastrointestinal dysfunction. Feeding problems, gastroesophageal reflux, swallowing dysfunction, and obstipation require referral and treatment in the usual manner.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Physical therapy with attention to stretching exercises can help maintain joint range of motion and prevent secondary contractures, thus prolonging the ability to walk.

Respiratory problems require early intervention.

Surveillance



The following should be monitored from early childhood:

Developmental progress

Neurologic features, with special attention to the onset of spasticity

Onset and frequency of seizures and response to antiepileptic medications

Number and type of infections

Autistic-like features

Gastrointestinal symptoms

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.