

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with MEGDEL syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Complete audiologic examination including hearing test, brain stem auditory evoked potentials (BAEP) Complete neurologic examination, including brain MRI Complete orthopedic examination for evidence of contractures and/or scoliosis needing treatment Developmental assessment, IQ testing Complete pulmonary examination for evidence of respiratory problems due to excessive drooling and/or scoliosis needing treatment Complete investigation of liver function including ASAT, ALAT, gamma-GT, serum concentration of bilirubin (total and direct), serum concentration of ammonia, clotting tests Complete evaluation of feeding and diet to determine if tube feeding is necessary Evaluation of excessive drooling (if present) for evidence of aspiration and/or dehydration ECG Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment is supportive. Care is best provided by a multidisciplinary team including a metabolic pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, dietician, and physical therapist when possible. Applicable supportive treatment [SB Wortmann, personal communication] includes: For (progressive) spasticity. Some patients experienced (temporary) improvement of spasticity with treatment with oral or intrathecal baclofen. For excessive drooling. Patients experienced great improvement (e.g., of respiratory problems) with botulinum toxin injection in the salivary glands, extirpation of salivary glands, and/or re-routing of glandular ducts. For failure to thrive. An age-appropriate diet given via nasogastric tube or gastrostomy can greatly improve overall clinical condition.

Surveillance

 Surveillance includes neurologic and orthopedic evaluations as needed based on individual findings.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Medications known to impair mitochondrial function (e.g., valproic acid) should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.