

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1), evaluation for the following most common MEN1 syndrome-associated tumors (as described in Clinical Description) is recommended: Multiglandular parathyroid disease Prolactinoma Gastrinoma and other entero-pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Clinical practice guidelines for MEN type 1 have been developed [Thakker et al 2012] (full text).

PHPT

 Parathyroidectomy is the treatment of choice for patients with MEN1, but it is controversial whether to perform subtotal (3.5 glands) or total parathyroidectomy, and whether surgery should be performed at an early or late stage of the disease. Subtotal parathyroidectomy (i.e. removal of ≤3.5 glands) has resulted in persistent or recurrent hypercalcemia within ten to 12 years after surgery in 40%-60% of patients with MEN1, and in hypocalcemia requiring long-term therapy with vitamin D or its active metabolite calcitriol in 10%-30% [Thakker et al 2012]. Total parathyroidectomy with autotransplantation in the forearm may use both fresh and cryopreserved parathyroid tissue. Procedure is dependent on the vitality of cryopreserved cells, which declines with the time interval from cryopreservation to autotransplantation. Intraoperative monitoring of PTH by rapid assay during surgery to determine successful removal of hyperfunctioning parathyroid tissue, and to help with the decision to implant parathyroid tissue in the forearm. Recurrent hypercalcemia is present in more than 50% of patients with autotransplanted parathyroid tissue, and surgical removal of the transplanted grafts is not always successful. Subtotal parathyroidectomy is suggested as the initial treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism in MEN1; total parathyroidectomy with autotransplantation may also be reserved for those with extensive disease either at first or at repeat surgery [Thakker et al 2012]. Parathyroidectomy may be reserved for symptomatic hypercalcemic patients with MEN1 while asymptomatic hypercalcemic patients with MEN1 do not undergo parathyroid surgery but have regular assessment for symptom onset and complications. Bone anti-resorptive agents administered prior to surgery help to reduce hypercalcemia and limit PTH-dependent bone resorption, thus reducing future risk of osteoporosis. Some studies have reported that treatment of MEN1-associated hyperparathyroidism by calcimimetics (which act on the calcium-sensing receptor) or octreotide LAR could be also effective, particularly for individuals in whom surgery either has failed or is contraindicated [Faggiano et al 2008, Falchetti et al 2008, Moyes et al 2010].

Pituitary Tumors

 
              PRL-secreting tumors (prolactinomas) Dopamine agonists such as cabergoline, bromocriptine, pergolide, and quinagolide are the preferred treatment for PRL-secreting tumors. Cabergoline may be considered the current treatment of choice because of its limited side effects and greater potency [Tichomirowa et al 2009]. 
              Growth hormone-secreting tumors Transsphenoidal surgery, the first treatment of choice in growth hormone-secreting tumors causing acromegaly, is effective in 50%-70% of cases. Somatostatin analogs are the medical therapy of choice for the treatment of growth hormone-secreting tumors. Octreotide and lanreotide normalize serum concentration of hGH and IGF1 in more than 50% of treated individuals [Beckers et al 2003]. Dopamine agonists are only rarely effective in treatment of growth hormone-secreting tumors causing acromegaly, although they can be effective in mixed GH-PRL-secreting adenomas and 10%-20% of tumors resistant to somatostatin analogs [Colao et al 1997, Marzullo et al 1999, Freda 2002]. 
              ACTH-secreting tumors In most ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors associated with Cushing syndrome, the treatment is excision of an adenoma. In the series of Beckers et al [2003], 92% of individuals with an identified microadenoma and 67% with a macro-adenoma were considered to be cured immediately after surgery. For those ACTH-secreting pituitary tumors associated with Cushing syndrome that are not cured neurosurgically, radiotherapy may be necessary to reduce the production of ACTH. 
              Non-secreting pituitary adenomas In non-secreting pituitary adenomas, surgical treatment using a transsphenoidal approach is the treatment of choice. However, in rare cases of very large adenomas with considerable extracellar extension, the transfrontal approach is the only possibility [Beckers 2002]. In 5%-15% of cases, medical treatment with potent dopaminergic agonists or with somatostatin analogs may shrink the adenoma before surgery [Colao et al 1998]. Published data are not sufficient to compare the treatment of sporadic versus MEN1 syndrome-associated pituitary tumors. Although opinion on this issue differs, Beckers et al [2003] have suggested that aggressive therapy is more frequently needed in MEN1-associated pituitary tumors than in sporadic tumors.

Well-Differentiated Tumors of the Gastro-Entero-Pancreatic (GEP) Tract

 
              Gastrinoma Medications that can control some of the GEP hormone excess-dependent features of MEN1 syndrome and thus prevent severe and sometimes life-threatening morbidity in MEN1 syndrome include proton pump inhibitors or H2-receptor blockers to reduce gastric acid output [Jensen 1999]. Surgical (versus nonsurgical) management of gastrinoma in MEN1 syndrome is controversial as successful outcome of surgery is rare. Because MEN1 syndrome gastrinomas occur most commonly in the first and second portions of the duodenum, and less commonly the third and fourth portions of the duodenum and the first jejunal loop, it is important that all these sites be examined during preoperative imaging, intraoperative exploration, and pathologic examination of surgical specimens [Tonelli et al 2005]. A case of a primary lymph node gastrinoma in an individual with MEN1 has been reported and a review of similar cases in the international literature reveals that some gastrinomas in lymph nodes are not the result of metastastic spread. A long-term symptom-free follow up after the excision of a lymph node gastrinoma is the only reliable criterion for the diagnosis of a primary lymph node tumor. Thus, the findings of Zhou et al [2006] supported the possibility that any gastrinoma in persons with MEN1 syndrome should be surgically resected for cure if possible. Anlauf et al [2008] reported the presence of a primary lymph node gastrinoma or occult duodenal microgastrinoma with lymph node metastases in a person with MEN1 syndrome, confirming the need for a systematic search for the primary tumor. Pancreatic tumors. Pancreatic surgery for asymptomatic individuals with MEN1 syndrome is controversial. Surgery is usually indicated for insulinoma and most of the other pancreatic tumors observed in MEN1 syndrome. According to Tonelli et al [2005], the best surgical approach for an MEN1 insulinoma is intraoperative localization of nodules greater than approximately 0.5 cm diameter by palpation or intraoperative ultrasound followed either by enucleation (removal) of these nodules or by pancreatic resection if multiple large deep tumors are present. The optimal therapy of gastrinoma is controversial. In non-metastasizing gastrinoma within the pancreas, surgery may be curative and should be performed by an experienced endocrine surgeon. MEN1 patients will have multiple small submucosal duodenal gastrinomas and in experienced surgical centers local excision of these tumors with lymph node dissection, duodenectomy, or less commonly duodenopancreatectomy may be also considered together with patient preferences, as such approaches may improve the cure rate. Whipple pancreaticoduodenectomy provides the greatest likelihood of cure for gastrinoma in patients with MEN1, but can be associated with an increased operative mortality and long-term morbidity unless performed by an experienced surgeon. Non-resectable tumor mass can be treated with somatostatin analogs, biotherapy, targeted radionuclide therapy, locoregional treatments and chemotherapy. Inoperable or metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) may be subjected to a chemotherapy. Sunitinib and everolimus may be used for patients with advanced (inoperable or metastatic) progressive well differentiated pancreatic NETs [Thakker et al 2012]. Treatment for non-functioning pancreatic NETs is controversial, some centers considered surgical resection for lesions that are greater than 1 cm in size; other centers recommend surgery only if the tumor is greater than 2 cm. Occult metastatic disease (i.e. tumors not detected by imaging investigations) may be present in a substantial proportion of these patients at the time of initial presentation.

Carcinoid Tumors

 Long-acting somatostatin analogs can control the secretory hyperfunction associated with carcinoid syndrome [Tomassetti et al 2000]; however, the risk for malignant progression of the tumor remains unchanged [Schnirer et al 2003]. Therefore, the treatment of choice for carcinoid is surgical removal, if resectable. Thymic carcinoid recurred in all individuals with MEN1 syndrome who were followed for more than one year after resection of the tumor [Gibril et al 2003]. For unresectable tumors and those individuals with metastatic disease, treatment with radiotherapy or chemotherapeutic agents (e.g. cisplatin, etoposide) may be used [Oberg et al 2008].

Adrenocortical Tumors

 Consensus guidelines for the management of MEN1-associated non-functioning tumors do not exist. The risk for malignancy is increased if the tumor has a diameter greater than 4 cm, although adrenocortical carcinomas have been identified in tumors smaller than 4 cm [Thakker et al 2012]. Surgery is suggested for adrenal tumors greater than 4 cm in diameter, for tumors that are 1-4 cm in diameter with atypical or suspicious radiologic features, or for tumors that show significant measurable growth over a six-month interval [Langer et al 2002, Schaefer et al 2008, Gatta-Cherifi et al 2012].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 The organs in MEN1 syndrome at highest risk for malignant tumor development — the duodenum, pancreas, and lungs (bronchial carcinoids) — are not suitable for ablative surgery. The only prophylactic surgery possible in MEN1 syndrome is thymectomy to prevent thymic carcinoid [Brandi et al 2001]. Prophylactic thymectomy should be considered at the time of neck surgery for primary hyperparathyroidism in males with MEN1 syndrome, particularly those who are smokers or have relatives with thymic carcinoid [Ferolla et al 2005].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Postoperative hypoparathyroidism. Measurement of serum concentration of parathyroid hormone (PTH) on the first day following subtotal or total parathyroidectomy may be a good predictor of residual parathyroid function [Debruyne et al 1999, Mozzon et al 2004]. Repeated measurements of serum calcium concentration are also useful and less expensive than measurement of the serum concentration of PTH [Debruyne et al 1999]. After autotransplantation of the parathyroid glands, the serum concentration of PTH should be assessed no earlier than two months post-operatively and once a year thereafter; serum concentration of PTH should be measured simultaneously in separate blood samples, one from the arm without a parathyroid autotransplant and one from the arm with the parathyroid autotransplant. This procedure allows the physician both to assess the function of the transplanted parathyroid tissue and monitor for possible recurrence of hyperparathyroidism. Intraoperative hypertensive crisis. Although pheochromocytoma occurs rarely in MEN1 syndrome, it is appropriate to measure urinary catecholamines prior to surgery to diagnose and treat a pheochromocytoma to avoid dangerous and potentially lethal blood pressure peaks during surgery.

Surveillance

 Routine surveillance using biochemical testing and imaging is recommended for asymptomatic individuals with an MEN1 pathogenic variant and others at risk for MEN1 syndrome-associated tumors (i.e., those known to have MEN1 syndrome and those with an affected parent who have not undergone molecular genetic testing); surveillance should begin in early childhood and continue for life. Early detection and treatment of the potentially malignant neuroendocrine tumors should reduce the morbidity and mortality of MEN1 syndrome. Such screening can detect the onset of the disease about ten years before symptoms develop, thereby providing an opportunity for earlier treatment [Bassett et al 1998].

MEN1 Minimal Surveillance Program 

 
              For individuals known to have MEN1 syndrome or a family-specific pathogenic variant in MEN1 2, 3 
                  Biochemical investigations Yearly, beginning at the specified age: Serum concentration of prolactin, IGF-1, fasting glucose and insulin from age five years 2 Fasting total serum calcium concentration (corrected for albumin) and/or ionized-serum calcium concentration, chromogranin–A, pancreatic polypeptide, glucagon, vasocative intestinal peptide for other pancreatic NET from age eight years 2 Fasting serum gastrin concentration from age 20 years 2 To be considered: fasting serum concentration of intact (full-length) PTH 
                  Imaging Every three to five years beginning at the specified age; the interval depending on whether there is biochemical evidence of a neoplasia and/or signs and symptoms of an MEN1-related tumor 2: Head MRI from age five years 2 Abdominal CT or MRI from age 20 years 2 To be considered: yearly chest CT, somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) octreotide scan Notes: 1. Brandi et al [2001], Thakker et al [2012] 2. According to the International Guidelines for Diagnosis and Therapy of MEN Type 1 and Type 2 [Brandi et al 2001], and Clinical Practice Guidelines for MEN Type 1 [Thakker et al 2012] 3. Can be modified according to clinical suspicion and/or findings in an individual 
              For individuals at 50% risk of having MEN1 syndrome in whom genetic status is unknown Biochemical investigations. Yearly, beginning at the specified age: Serum concentration of prolactin from age five years Fasting total serum calcium concentration (corrected for albumin) and/or ionized-serum calcium concentration from age ten years Fasting serum concentration of intact (full-length) PTH from age ten years Fasting serum gastrin concentration if individual has symptoms of ZES (reflux or diarrhea) from age 20 years

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Molecular genetic testing should be offered to at-risk members of a family in which a germline MEN1 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected relative [Lairmore et al 2004]. When molecular genetic testing for an MEN1 pathogenic variant is not possible or is not informative, individuals at 50% risk (i.e., first-degree relatives of an individual with MEN1 syndrome) should undergo routine evaluation (see Surveillance). See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT). An Italian group described preliminary results of the use of cinacalcet (a calcimimetic drug) over a 12-month period in an individual with local recurrence of MEN1-PHPT. A dose of 30 mg daily was well tolerated. Serum concentration of calcium and PTH rapidly normalized and bone mass increased over pre-treatment with a return to normal bone turnover in the absence of antiresorptive agents [Falchetti et al 2008]. Another group followed eight individuals with MEN1-PHPT for a range of ten to 35 months. All were commenced on cinacalcet at a dose of 30 mg. Significant reductions were observed in serum calcium and PTH measurements; and cinacalcet was well tolerated [Moyes et al 2010]. Another Italian group treated eight individuals with MEN1-PHPT for six months with octreotide-LAR at a dose of 30 mg every four weeks in order to stabilize the duodenum-pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor before parathyroidectomy [Faggiano et al 2008]. Hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria normalized in 75% and 62.5%, respectively. Serum concentrations of PTH decreased significantly in all treated individuals and normalized in 25%. However, larger studies are needed before introducing cinacalcet and/or octreotide-LAR as a cure for MEN1-PHPT. Ablation using ethanol injection has been suggested as an alternative to reoperation of recurrent primary hyperparathyroidism [Veldman et al 2008]. Pituitary tumors. In a MEN1 animal model with a pituitary PRL-secreting adenoma, monotherapy with the anti-VEGF-A monoclonal antibody (mAb) G6-31 was studied. Tumor growth was evaluated by MRI and vascular density in tissue sections was assessed. Significant inhibition of the growth of the pituitary adenoma leading to an increased mean tumor doubling-free survival and lowering of serum prolactin concentration were observed in treated animals but not controls. Additionally, the vascular density in pancreatic islet tumors was significantly reduced by the treatment. Such findings suggest that VEGF-A blockade may represent a nonsurgical treatment for benign tumors of the endocrine system, including those associated with MEN1 syndrome [Korsisaari et al 2008]. Well-differentiated tumors of the gastro-entero-pancreatic (GEP) tract. Somatostatin analogs may be used to control proliferation of enterochromaffin-like cells. In one study, long-term administration of octreotide resulted in regression of a type II gastric carcinoid tumor [Tomassetti et al 2000]. As for MEN1-primary hyperparathyroidism, more extensive studies are needed to establish the efficacy of such molecules for clinical use in individuals with MEN1-ZES. Inhibitors of tyrosine kinase receptors (TKRs) and of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway have been reported to be effective in treating pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NET) [Raymond et al 2011, Yao et al 2011] because pancreatic NET may express TKRs. Treatment of individuals who have advanced, well-differentiated pancreatic NET with sunitimib malate, which inhibits TKRs, led to increased overall survival and a doubling in progression-free survival when compared to affected individuals receiving placebo. Treatment of individuals who have advanced, low-grade, or intermediate-grade pancreatic NET with everolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, also led to a doubling of median progression-free survival when compared to affected individuals who received placebo [Yao et al 2011]. These two studies mainly included individuals without MEN1; in fact, in the sunitimib study (comprising 171 individuals), only two individuals had MEN1 and neither was in the treatment arm [Raymond et al 2011]. In the everolimus study (410 individuals), details of MEN1 status were not provided. However, it seems highly plausible that these results can be extrapolated to individuals with MEN1 harboring pancreatic NET [Thakker et al 2012]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.