

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in a male diagnosed with Menkes disease, the following evaluations are recommended: Developmental assessment Evaluation of feeding and nutrition Assessment of bladder function Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor To establish the extent of disease and needs in a male diagnosed with occipital horn syndrome (OHS), evaluations for the following are recommended: Bladder diverticula Inguinal hernias Vascular tortuosity Dysautonomia (chronic diarrhea, orthostatic hypotension). Note: Some medical centers have clinical autonomic testing laboratories. Mild cognitive deficits Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor To establish the extent of disease and needs in a male diagnosed with ATP7A-related distal motor neuropathy (DMN), the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic examination EMG with nerve conduction studies Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 
            Menkes disease Gastrostomy tube placement to manage caloric intake and general nutrition in some males with classic Menkes disease Surgery for bladder diverticula that occur in classic Menkes disease Developmental intervention 
            ATP7A-related DMN Physical therapy (strength and stretching exercises) Occupational therapy Ankle foot orthotics

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Menkes disease. In classic Menkes disease, treatment with subcutaneous injections of copper histidine or copper chloride before age ten days normalizes developmental outcome in some individuals and improves the neurologic outcome in others [Kaler et al 2008, Kaler et al 2010]. Note: Despite very early copper histidine treatment, some infants show no significant improvement relative to the natural history of untreated Menkes disease [Kaler et al 1995, Kaler et al 2008]. The type and severity of the ATP7A pathogenic variant determine the response to early copper treatment. To maintain serum copper concentration in the normal range (70-150 µg/dL), the suggested dose of copper chloride is: For children age <1 year: 250 µg administered subcutaneously 2x/day For children age >1 year: 250 µg administered subcutaneously 1x/day Occipital horn syndrome. Although there is no evidence that copper replacement therapy for OHS is clinically beneficial, it would be reasonable to expect even better overall neurodevelopmental and neurocognitive outcomes if individuals with OHS were identified early and treated with copper during their first three years.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Antibiotic prophylaxis may be necessary to prevent bladder infection.

Surveillance

 For infants being treated with copper histidine or copper chloride, monitor serum copper and ceruloplasmin levels to avoid supranormal levels.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to test male relatives at risk for Menkes disease for the ATP7A pathogenic variant identified in the family before age ten days in order to promptly begin copper replacement treatment (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations). See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Adeno-associated viral gene therapy in a mouse model is under active investigation with promising early results [Donsante et al 2011]. Newborn screening is not currently available for Menkes disease because biochemical strategies are not practical with current newborn screening platforms. A pilot study to evaluate the potential of sequence analysis of ATP7A from dried blood spots is currently in progress. If successful, such testing would allow early diagnosis and treatment. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Therapies proven to be ineffective include vitamin C.