

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish medical needs and extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly (MFDM), the following evaluations are recommended: In newborns: airway assessment for evidence of upper-airway obstruction with or without choanal atresia and urgent evaluation for possible esophageal atresia Audiology assessment (see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview) Examination for midline cleft palate, and referral to multidisciplinary cleft palate team as required Cardiology and/or echocardiographic assessment for structural heart defects Renal ultrasound examination Developmental assessment Other evaluations as dictated by the specific clinical situation (e.g., skeletal x-ray for scoliosis) Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 
            Mandibulofacial dysostosis
           Neonates with airway compromise at delivery may require intubation and/or tracheostomy for initial stabilization. Treatment of craniofacial manifestations is individualized and managed by a multidisciplinary team, which may include: oromaxillofacial surgery, plastic surgery, otolaryngology, dentistry/orthodontics, occupational and speech/language therapy. Intellectual disability. Occupational, physical, and/or speech/language therapies are involved as needed to optimize developmental outcome. Hearing loss. Treatment is individualized and may involve conventional hearing aid(s), bone-anchored hearing aid(s), and/or cochlear implant(s). See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview. Esophageal atresia is managed as for nonsyndromic forms of EA, the definitive management being surgical. See Esophageal Atresia/Tracheoesophageal fistula Overview. Cardiac defects are managed in a routine manner. Thumb anomalies. Preaxial polydactyly, if present, may be treated surgically; other thumb anomalies are not generally functionally significant. Short stature is managed expectantly. Of note, the response to human growth hormone has not been specifically reported.

Surveillance

 Surveillance includes monitoring of development by a physician with expertise in the disorder (typically a pediatrician). Clinical follow up should include measurement of growth parameters as well as specific enquiry into symptoms of seizures and obstructive sleep apnea.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Manifestations of MFDM in an affected fetus may include intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), polyhydramnios, increased nuchal translucency, and/or fetal structural anomalies (e.g., cardiac and renal defects). Management of an affected fetus should include a detailed (‘level II’) fetal ultrasound assessment, and consultation(s) with high-risk obstetrics and/or neonatology, as appropriate for the clinical situation. The delivery room team should be aware of the possible need for intubation in the event of airway compromise. Polyhydramnios, if present, should prompt urgent postnatal evaluation for esophageal atresia.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Studies of the Treacher-Collins syndrome (TCS) mouse show the craniofacial anomalies in that model to be p53-dependent [Jones et al 2008]. Although the role of p53 as a tumor suppressor protein makes it an unlikely therapeutic target, blockade of other proapoptotic genes downstream of p53 has been suggested as an alternative approach [Trainor et al 2009]. Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.