http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mfm

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with myofibrillar myopathy (MFM), the following evaluations are recommended:

EMG

Routine ECG to identify arrhythmias and cardiac conduction defects; Holter monitoring if symptoms suggest an intermittent arrhythmia; echocardiogram if cardiac symptoms are present

Respiratory function tests if respiratory symptoms are present

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Pacemaker and implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) should be considered in individuals with arrhythmia and/or cardiac conduction defects. Individuals with progressive or life-threatening cardiomyopathy are candidates for cardiac transplantation.

Respiratory support, consisting of continuous or bilevel positive airway pressure (CPAP or BIPAP), initially at night and later in the daytime, is indicated in individuals with hypercapnea and other signs of incipient ventilatory failure.

Range of motion physical therapy and assistive devices are appropriate for those with advanced muscle weakness. Treatment of scoliosis by spinal fusion is appropriate. Orthoses are indicated for treatment of foot drop.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Pacemaker or implantable cardioverter defibrillator placement for individuals with arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy.

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

Physical examination to monitor disease progression yearly or less often depending on rate of progression

Electrocardiogram and/or echocardiogram yearly for early detection of cardiomyopathy

Pulmonary function tests for individuals with exertional or nocturnal dyspnea.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 



Affected pregnant women may need assistance during delivery if they have significant weakness of their abdominal muscles.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



The role of strengthening exercises has not been defined.