http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mga3

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with OPA3-related methylglutaconic aciduria (Costeff syndrome), the following evaluations are recommended: Complete ophthalmologic examination Visual evoked potentials Complete neurologic examination Developmental/educational assessment Echocardiogram Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is supportive. A multidisciplinary team including a neurologist, orthopedic surgeon, ophthalmologist, biochemical geneticist, and physical therapist is required for the care of affected individuals. Visual impairment, spasticity, and movement disorder should be treated as in the general population.

Surveillance

Ophthalmologic, neurologic, and orthopedic evaluations as needed based on individual findings are appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided: Tobacco and alcohol use Medications known to impair mitochondrial function

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

A possible role for coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) has been hypothesized in the treatment of OPA3-related methylglutaconic aciduria because both 3-methylglutaconate (3-MGC) and CoQ10 can be produced from DMAPP, an intermediate metabolite in the synthesis of cholesterol [Costeff et al 1998]. Therefore, if CoQ10 production is impaired, more DMAPP would possibly be directed through the mevalonate shunt to 3-methyglutaconyl-CoA production. The findings of significantly lower-than-normal plasma concentrations of CoQ10 in six individuals with OPA3-related 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, in two individuals with Barth syndrome, and in four individuals with unclassified type 3-MGA-uria support this hypothesis. However, administration of CoQ10 to six individuals with OPA3-related 3-methylglutaconic aciduria showed no clinical benefit or change in the excretion of 3-MGC [Costeff et al 1998]. The question of whether initiation of CoQ10 supplements early in the course of disease would prevent some neurologic damage remains to be answered.