http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mhs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS), the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed: Arterial blood gas analysis; serum concentration of electrolytes, lactate, and CK; coagulation studies; presence of myoglobin in the urine and elevated myoglobin levels in serum. Continuous core temperature monitoring until the syndrome has resolved Measurement of serum CK concentrations until normalized Family history of anesthetic complications Once the syndrome has resolved, neurologic assessment for evidence of muscle damage Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

For management guidelines, see Guidelines/Consensus Statements and Figure 2. Early diagnosis of MH, together with the administration of dantrolene sodium, is essential in the successful treatment of an acute episode of MH: Discontinue use of potent inhalation agents and succinylcholine. Increase minute ventilation to lower end-tidal CO2. Get help. One resource is the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the US (MHAUS) hotline for acute cases: 800-MH-HYPER (800-644-9737). Similar hotlines exist in other countries, specifically the UK, Germany, and Brazil. Prepare and administer dantrolene: 2.5 mg/kg initial dose. Tachycardia, hypercarbia, and muscle rigidity respond rapidly; multiple doses of dantrolene may be needed. The suggested upper limit is 10 mg/kg; however, more may be given as needed. Continue dantrolene at 1.0 mg/kg every four to eight hours for 24-48 hours, titrating to the desired effect (resolution of hyperthermia, acidosis, and myoglobinemia). Dantrolene sodium is a hydantoin molecule that binds to a specific region of the RYR-1 channel. It decreases the uncontrolled release of intracellular calcium [Paul-Pletzer et al 2002]. The toxicity profile of dantrolene, when administered acutely, is extremely benign. Calcium channel blocking agents should not be administered with dantrolene because life-threatening hyperkalemia may result. Dantrolene may aggravate previously existing muscle weakness. Begin cooling measures. If patient is hyperthermic, administer iced solutions, ice packs to groin, axilla, and neck, nasogastric lavage with iced solution, or more aggressive measures as needed. Stop cooling measures at core body temperature of 38.5° C. Treat cardiac arrhythmias as needed. Do not use calcium channel blockers. Obtain blood gases, serum concentration of electrolytes and CK, blood and urine for myoglobin, and coagulation profile. Check values every six to 12 hours. The earliest sign of rhabdomyolysis is myoglobinuria/myoglobinemia. Serum CK levels may not rise for several hours. Serum CK concentration may remain elevated for days and should be monitored until it returns to normal. Treat hyperkalemia with hyperventilation, glucose and insulin, and calcium as dictated by laboratory and cardiovascular changes. Ensure urine output of 2.0 mL/kg/hr with mannitol, furosemide, and fluids as needed. Evaluate need for invasive monitoring and continued mechanical ventilation. Observe the individual in an ICU for at least 36 hours because of the 25% chance of recrudescence following initial treatment. Dantrolene should be continued for at least 36 hours following successful treatment in a dose of about 1.0 mg/kg every six hours or more depending on whether signs of MH are present. Affected individuals who display extreme hyperthermia are at risk for disseminated intravascular coagulation. A coagulation profile should be obtained on all individuals experiencing fulminant MH. Refer the affected individual to the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the US (MHAUS) for information and counseling. Complete the Adverse Metabolic Reaction to Anesthesia (AMRA) form for enrollment in the North American MH Registry. Refer the individual to a MH diagnostic center for muscle biopsy and contracture testing after discussion with MH consultants associated with MHAUS. Myoglobinuria. The presence of myoglobinuria mandates referral to a neurologist for further investigation.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Preventive measures for individuals known to be susceptible to MH or for any individual with an equivocal contracture test response (MHE) (treated clinically as MHS): For any individual undergoing anesthesia, obtain a thorough anesthetic history to determine the possibility of the individual or a family member having experienced an MH episode. When suspicion of MHS exists, family members should not be given trigger anesthetic agents, i.e., potent volatile anesthetic agents such as halothane, sevoflurane, desflurane, enflurane, and isoflurane or the depolarizing agent succinylcholine. In general, individuals undergoing general anesthetics that exceed 30 minutes in duration should have their temperature monitored using an electronic temperature probe. Skin liquid crystal temperature sensors are not recommended as they have been found to be unreliable indicators of changing temperature during human malignant hyperthermia (MH) events. Individuals with any form of myotonia (see Differential Diagnosis) should not receive succinylcholine. Individuals with central core disease, multiminicore disease, nemaline myopathy, congenital fiber-type disproportion, or Duchenne or Becker muscular dystrophy should not receive trigger anesthetics. Individuals with MHS should carry proper identification as to their susceptibility; identification bracelets are available through the Medic Alert Foundation, Turlock, California (www.medicalert.org).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals who are MH susceptible should avoid potent inhalation anesthetics and succinylcholine. Calcium channel blockers should not be given together with dantrolene because life-threatening hyperkalemia may result. Serotonin antagonist (5HT3-anatagonist) antiemetics should be used cautiously, as sudden death has been reported in a child with multiminicore disease caused by a pathogenic variant in RYR1 (p.Arg3983His) after receiving a therapeutic dose of ondansetron [Gener et al 2010]. Individuals with MH are generally advised to avoid extremes of heat but not to restrict athletic activity or lifestyle unless they have experienced overt rhabdomyolysis or heat stroke. In individuals with MH undergoing cardiac bypass surgery, aggressive rewarming should be avoided, as it may be associated with development of clinical signs of MH [Metterlein et al 2011b].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If a pathogenic variant has been identified in the family, molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives is warranted to identify those who also have the pathogenic variant and thus will benefit from avoiding anesthetic agents that increase the risk for a malignant hyperthermia episode. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

If a pregnant woman with MHS requires non-emergent surgery during the pregnancy, a non-triggering anesthetic (local, nerve block, epidural, spinal anesthesia, or a total intravenous general anesthetic) should be administered. Standard American Society of Anesthesiologists mandated monitoring should be used, along with core temperature monitoring. Fetal monitoring should follow standard guidelines. Dantrolene should not be administered in preparation for surgery or labor and delivery. Continuous epidural analgesia is highly recommended for labor and delivery. If a Cesarean delivery is indicated in a woman who does not have an epidural catheter in place, neuraxial (spinal, epidural, or combined spinal-epidural) anesthesia is recommended, if not otherwise contraindicated. If a general anesthetic is indicated, a total intravenous anesthetic technique should be administered, with an anesthesia machine that has been prepared for an MH-susceptible individual. In the case of a fetus whose father is known to be MH susceptible but whose mother is not known to be MH susceptible, regional anesthesia or general anesthesia without trigger agents is recommended. For further information regarding the management of pregnant women with MHS, see 2009 guidelines developed by the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States.

Therapies Under Investigations

Preliminary investigation by Lanner et al [2012] has shown that 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside (AICAR) prevents heat-induced sudden death in a knock-out mouse model of MH. This finding is suggestive of possible effectiveness of AICAR in the prophylactic treatment of humans with enhanced susceptibility to exercise/ heat-induced sudden death associated with mutation of RYR1. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.