

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Milroy disease, the following evaluations are recommended: Medical genetics consultation Referral to a lymphedema therapist Lymphoscintigraphy

Treatment of Manifestations

 Guidance by a lymphedema therapist regarding management of edema (e.g., fitting stockings, massage) is important. Although the edema cannot be cured, some improvement is usually possible with the use of properly fitted compression hosiery and/or bandaging and well fitting, supportive shoes. Toe gloves may be of benefit and good skin care is essential. Such treatment measures may improve the cosmetic appearance of the limb, decrease the size of the limb, and reduce the risk of complications.

Prevention of Secondary Complications 

 Secondary cellulitis is prevented through the following measures: Prevention of foot infections, particularly athlete's foot/infected eczema  Prompt treatment for early cellulitis with appropriate antibiotics. It may be necessary to give the first few doses intravenously.  Prophylactic antibiotics in recurrent cases (e.g., penicillin V 500 mg daily) 

Surveillance 

 Routine follow up in a clinic specializing in the care of lymphedema is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 The following should be avoided: Wounds to the swollen limbs, because of their reduced resistance to infection  Long periods of immobility with the legs in a dependent position (e.g., on a long airplane flight) Medications, particularly calcium channel-blocking drugs, that can cause increased leg swelling in some individuals 

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 If the FLT4 pathogenic variant in a family is known, molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives ensures identification of those who will benefit from treatment early in the disease course.  If the pathogenic variant in a family is not known, evaluation of relatives at risk by physical examination is appropriate in order to identify those who will benefit from treatment early in the course of the disease. The use of properly fitted compression hosiery and advice to reduce the risk of cellulitis of the legs and feet can be beneficial.  See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

 Ultrasound scanning during pregnancy may indicate if a fetus is affected if swelling of the dorsum of the feet is noted in the second or third trimester. The fetus may have mild pleural effusions which frequently resolve before birth [S Mansour, personal communication]. Very rarely, the fetus may present with hydrops fetalis. If the mother is affected by Milroy disease there may be an increase in swelling during the pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Attempts at over-expressing VEGF-C, the ligand for FLT4, have been successful in producing functional lymphatics in mice [Karkkainen et al 2000b]. This is now in clinical trial in Finland for human breast cancer-related lymphedema. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Treatment with diuretics is of no proven benefit.