http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/miyoshi

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with dysferlinopathy, the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment of strength and function in the arms, hands, legs, and feet; especially calf muscle If needed, measurement of serum CK concentration Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No definitive treatments exist for the limb-girdle muscular dystrophies. Management should be tailored to each individual and each specific subtype. A general approach to appropriate management can prolong survival and improve quality of life. This general approach is based on the typical progression and complications of individuals with LGMD as described by McDonald et al [1995] and Bushby [1999]. Physical therapy and stretching exercises to promote mobility and prevent contractures Use of mechanical aids such as canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs as needed to help ambulation and mobility Surgical intervention as needed for orthopedic complications such as foot deformity and scoliosis Use of respiratory aids when indicated Social and emotional support and stimulation to maximize a sense of social involvement and productivity and to reduce the sense of social isolation common in these disorders

Prevention of Secondary Complications 

Stretching exercises to prevent contractures are indicated.

Surveillance

The following surveillance is appropriate: Annual monitoring of muscle strength, joint range of motion, and respiratory function Monitoring for evidence of cardiomyopathy in those subtypes with known occurrence of cardiac involvement

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Control weight to avoid obesity; avoid use of steroids [Walter et al 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk 

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A double-blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial of deflazacort in individuals with genetically confirmed dysferlinopathy has been completed [Walter et al 2013]. After six months of treatment, muscle strength did not improve; rather, there was a trend towards worsening muscle strength for affected individuals on deflazacort treatment. Muscle strength improved after the study drug was discontinued. Side effects included a broad spectrum typically seen in those taking steroids. Therefore, deflazacort treatment is not effective as a therapy for individuals with dysferlinopathies; additionally, the authors concluded that steroid treatment in general should be avoided in this condition [Walter et al 2013]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.