http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mkks

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with McKusick-Kaufman Syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Pelvic ultrasound examination to detect genitourinary malformations (Table 3) Skeletal radiographs to detect osseous polydactyly and syndactyly ECG and echocardiogram, to detect congenital heart defects Renal ultrasound examination and a renal imaging study to detect pelvicalyceal abnormalities, renal hypoplasia, or cystic dysplasia of the kidneys Assessment of height, weight, and head circumference and initiation of a carefully maintained growth chart to document obesity that may indicate Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS). Determination of developmental status by standard screening tools to detect developmental delay that may indicate BBS. If delays are identified, a more detailed assessment of developmental and cognitive abilities is indicated. Ophthalmologic examination and electroretinogram to evaluate for manifestations of BBS in children with weight greater than the 90th centile and/or short stature and/or developmental delay or intellectual disability. Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Prompt surgical repair of the obstruction causing hydrometrocolpos and drainage of the accumulated fluid is important. Standard treatment is indicated for the following: Polydactyly and syndactyly Congenital heart defects Anal anomalies and Hirschsprung disease (surgical treatment)

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Recurrent urinary tract infections and re-stenosis of the vaginal orifice are the most common complications in individuals with MKS following surgical drainage of the HMC [Slavotinek & Biesecker 2000]. Care should be taken with anesthesia in the neonatal period if severe hydrometrocolpos causing diaphragmatic compression is present. Gastric decompression and preoxygenation prior to tracheal intubation were used in the anesthetic management of one neonate with severe hydrometrocolpos compressing the diaphragm [Tekin et al 2003].

Surveillance

The following are appropriate: In individuals with renal abnormalities, monitoring of blood pressure and renal function. In individuals with interim history of severe constipation, rectal biopsy to exclude Hirschsprung disease Continuing surveillance for manifestations that would establish the diagnosis of BBS including the following: Serial growth measurements to track height and weight until at least age five years to document obesity that can occur with BBS Developmental assessments until at least age five years to detect developmental disabilities that can occur with BBS Regular ophthalmologic examination and electroretinogram (ERG) (if appropriate) after age five years to evaluate for visual signs and symptoms of retinitis pigmentosa [A Verloes, personal communication] As diabetes mellitus is a rare complication of BBS, measurement of fasting blood glucose as appropriate Investigations for rarer complications of BBS, including hearing assessment, dental assessment, electroencephalogram, and thyroid function tests as appropriate Consideration of later complications of surgery for HMC, including recurrent urinary tract infections and re-stenosis and infection of the vaginal tract [Lueth & Wood 2014]. Surveillance as appropriate for each individual is recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

In the newborn with severe HMC, care with anesthesia in the neonatal period is appropriate, as HMC can cause diaphragmatic compression.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known: Sisters of females with MKS should have examination of the external genitalia for vaginal membranes or an imperforate vagina and of the hands and feet for polydactyly, and an echocardiogram for the congenital heart defects associated with MKS. Brothers of affected females should have an examination of the external genitalia for hypospadias, cryptorchidism, and chordee and of the hands and feet for polydactyly, and an echocardiogram for cardiac manifestations of MKS. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.