http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ml2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 In order to establish the extent of disease in a child diagnosed with mucolipidosis II (ML II), the following evaluations are recommended: Radiographic skeletal survey, if not performed or incomplete in the diagnostic evaluation. Such survey in early infancy is important for comparison with similar radiographs in the third year of life. Cardiac evaluation with echocardiography to assess valve thickening and ventricular size and function Pulmonary radiographs; an important means of monitoring interstitial lung disease in any serious intrathoracic airway infection. Chest CT may better show fibrotic changes in the lungs. It is doubtful that the child with ML II can cooperate sufficiently to achieve reliable pulmonary function tests, by which the restrictive respiratory deficiency could be documented more objectively. Baseline ophthalmologic examination Hearing screen Developmental assessment to help establish appropriate expectations for the child’s developmental progress Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Supportive and symptomatic management is indicated. Joint. No measures are effective in treating the progressive limitation of motion in large and small joints. The classic physiotherapeutic early intervention programs that are often beneficial in children with developmental delay, neuromotor delay, or cerebral palsy cannot be recommended unequivocally in ML II because of the following: Stretching exercises are ineffective and painful. The unknowing therapist may inflict damage to the surrounding joint capsule and adjacent tendons and cause subsequent soft tissue calcification. Therapies that are “low impact” in regard to joint and tendon strain, including short sessions of aqua therapy, are usually well tolerated. Cognitive. Intellectual impairment in ML II is rarely severe. It is often milder than the adverse impression created by the significantly impaired development of speech: any well-adapted program of cognitive stimulation such as interactive play is recommended, such as a stimulation program that favors alertness, imitative skills, ambition, and even some active motion. Occupational and speech therapy are important, the former being the more effective of the two. Dental. Severe gingival thickening can compromise routine dental cleaning. Mouth pain, infections, and even abscesses have been successfully treated with gingivectomy in some patients (see Prevention of Secondary Complications). Otic. Myringotomy tube placement for recurrent ear infections is common but should not be considered a routine procedure because of the unique airway issues and hence risk associated with anesthesia (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Because of concerns about airway management, surgical intervention should be avoided as much as possible and undertaken only in tertiary care settings with pediatric anesthesiologists and intensive care. Children with ML II are small and have a small airway, reduced tracheal suppleness from stiff connective tissue, and progressive narrowing of the airway from mucosal thickening. The use of a much smaller endotracheal tube than for age- and size-matched children is necessary. Poor compliance of the thoracic cage and the progressively sclerotic lung parenchyma further complicate airway management. Extubation may also be challenging in ML II.

Surveillance

 Infants and toddlers with ML II and their families benefit from outpatient follow-up visits approximately every three months. Subsequently throughout early childhood, two outpatient visits per year may be adequate until cardiac and respiratory monitoring need to be more frequent.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Since individuals with ML II do not survive into adulthood, there have not been any reports of affected individuals who have become pregnant. In women who have a fetus diagnosed prenatally with ML II, the fetus should be carefully monitored for intrauterine growth retardation and skeletal changes such as extraosseous calcifications and/or osteolytic lesions. Ultrasound abnormalities are not present in all affected pregnancies.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Treatment of ML II by bone marrow transplantation or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation has been attempted in a few affected toddler-age children without any significant therapeutic result. Information on the outcome of recent transplantations in a few young children is not yet available. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.