

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with mucolipidosis III alpha/beta (ML III alpha/beta), the following evaluations are recommended: Radiographic skeletal survey if either not performed or incomplete in the diagnostic evaluation Baseline evaluations with an orthopedic surgeon and a metabolic bone specialist to better determine if/when surgical interventions or bisphosphonate therapy may be initiated (see Treatment of Manifestations) Cardiac evaluation with echocardiography to assess valve thickening and ventricular size and function Baseline ophthalmologic examination Hearing screen Developmental assessment to help establish appropriate expectations for the child’s developmental progress Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Supportive and symptomatic management is indicated. Skeletal. No measures are effective in treating the progressive limitation of motion in large and small joints. The classic physiotherapeutic early intervention programs that are often beneficial in children with developmental delay, neuromotor delay, or cerebral palsy cannot be recommended unequivocally in ML III alpha/beta for the following reasons: Stretching exercises are ineffective and painful. The unknowing therapist may inflict damage to the surrounding joint capsule and adjacent tendons and cause subsequent soft tissue calcification. Therapies that are “low impact” in regard to joint and tendon strain, including short sessions of aqua therapy, are usually well tolerated. Management of pain in the hips during and following walking requires attention from late childhood or early adolescence. Carpal tunnel signs may require tendon release procedures for temporary relief. Later in the disease course more general bone pain of variable intensity is present. Encouraging results have been obtained in several individuals with ML III alpha/beta with monthly IV administration of pamidronate, a biphosphonate. The recommended dose is 1 mg/kg monthly. The protocol under development is different from that applied to individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta. Bone density needs to be monitored closely. At present, information as to when in the disease course or at what age to initiate such treatment is insufficient. Bone pain in the two individuals about whom information has been published was reduced within a few months of initiating therapy. In some wheelchair-bound individuals ambulation has been transiently restored for more than one year. Bone densitometry is improved [Robinson et al 2002]. Several remarks need to be made regarding this symptomatic treatment: Parents and affected individuals must keep in mind that this treatment does not cure the disorder. It neither represses the slow process of bone resorption nor alters its course. The long-term effect(s) are unknown. The end point to the treatment regimen remains incompletely defined [Robinson et al 2002; Sillence, personal communication]. Not all affected individuals benefit from bisphosphonate treatment. The use of bisphosphonates in ML III alpha/beta and other bone diseases is an area of active clinical research worldwide. In older adolescents and adults with milder phenotypic variants of ML III alpha/beta, bilateral hip replacement has been successful. Audiologic. Recurrent otitis media occurs more often in ML III alpha/beta than in a control population. The prevalence decreases with age. Myringotomy tube placement may be considered necessary as a preventive measure of conductive hearing deficiency but should not be considered a “routine” procedure in this condition because of the unique airway issues and hence the anesthesia risks involved (see Prevention of Secondary Complications).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Because of concerns about airway management, surgical intervention should be avoided as much as possible and undertaken only in tertiary care settings with pediatric anesthesiologists and intensivists. Individuals with ML III alpha/beta are small and have a narrow airway, reduced tracheal suppleness from stiff connective tissue, and progressive narrowing of the airway from mucosal thickening. The use of a much smaller endotracheal tube than for age- and size-matched controls is necessary. Fiberoptic intubation must be available. Poor compliance of the thoracic cage and the progressively sclerotic lung parenchyma further complicate airway management, especially in older individuals. Functional decline of lung parenchyma is likely due at least in part to slowly progressive degeneration of soft connective tissue in the extracellular matrix, a phenomenon insufficiently studied but concomitant to the osteopenia in bone. As subclinical cardiac failure may become overt during anesthesia, any surgical intervention should be preceded by a thorough cardiologic evaluation Extubation may also be a challenge.

Surveillance

 Young children with ML III alpha/beta and their families benefit from outpatient clinic visits about twice a year. From age six years similar follow-up visits are recommended on a yearly basis unless bone pain and deteriorating ambulation become major handicaps and/or cardiac and respiratory monitoring need more frequent attention.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Preliminary results suggest that IV bisphosphonate may alleviate bone pain in some affected individuals; however, such treatment is still considered investigational. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.