http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ml3c

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with ML III gamma, the following evaluations are recommended: Basic assessment Growth parameters Pain assessment Orthopedic and functional assessments Psycho-developmental evaluation to follow the individual’s developmental progress and program appropriate management Skeletal survey Metabolic bone disease assessment including evaluation of bone densitometry by DEXA studies and evaluation of biomarkers reflecting bone metabolism [Robinson et al 2002] Cardiac Clinical examination ECG Echocardiography Ophthalmologic evaluation including slit lamp examination, fundoscopy, and visual acuity Medical genetics consultation for genetic counseling and reproductive decision making

Treatment of Manifestations

Supportive and symptomatic management is indicated. Psychosocial support of patients and families is recommended. No known measures are effective in treating the progressive limitation of motion in large and small joints. Physiotherapy intervention programs need to be adapted to the affected individual’s needs. Short sessions of aqua therapy that are “low impact” in regard to joint and tendon strain are usually well tolerated. Later in the disease course bone pain of variable intensity may become a frequent complaint. Management of pain in the hips is required. In older adolescents and adults with milder ML III gamma, bilateral hip replacement has been successful. Casts (especially of the hands) during the night hours are usually well tolerated and seem to improve daily functions. Carpal tunnel signs and rarely tarsal tunnel symptoms may require surgical tendon release procedures for temporary relief [Smuts et al 2009]. In severe cases, when significant valvular dysfunction disrupts ventricular function, valve replacement should be seriously considered.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Anesthesia. As with all storage diseases, anesthesia in ML III gamma must be well planned. Because of concerns about airway management, surgical intervention should be undertaken only in tertiary care settings with pediatric anesthesiologists and intensive care physicians. The anesthetic team should be aware of the following issues: Persons with ML III gamma are small and have a small airway, reduced tracheal suppleness from stiff connective tissue, and progressive narrowing of the airway from mucosal thickening. The use of a smaller endotracheal tube than for age- and size-matched controls is necessary. Fiberoptic intubation must be available. Persons with ML III gamma have short necks and atlanto-axial instability has been reported [Umehara et al 1997]. Jaw and neck movement can be limited Abnormalities of the spine and ribs can limit the individual’s capacity to breathe and fully expand the lungs. Antibiotic prophylaxis. Persons with valvular involvement should be given antibiotic prophylaxis before minor and major surgical procedures (including dental procedures) to prevent bacterial endocarditis.

Surveillance

Young children with ML III gamma and their families usually benefit from out-patient clinic visits once a year, unless cardiac and/or respiratory monitoring need more frequent attention. Orthopedic assessment should be done at least once a year, with more frequent follow-up visits if any deterioration is observed. Annual ophthalmologic assessment should address possible ophthalmologic changes. If necessary, an ERG should be considered to better evaluate for retinal impairment. During yearly visits, attention should be paid to pain relief, daily functional abilities, and psychological interventions. Although cardiac manifestations are usually asymptomatic, monitoring for progressive valvular insufficiency using echocardiography should occur at least once a year. Surveillance for metabolic bone disease includes DEXA scan in five-year intervals.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Vigorous stretching exercises are not recommended because they are ineffective, painful, and may damage the surrounding joint capsule and adjacent tendons.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

If both pathogenic alleles have been identified in the family, testing of at-risk sibs can be pursued. Note, however, that early diagnosis of affected individuals does not delay or halt disease progression [Author, personal observation]. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Several individuals with ML III alpha/beta have been treated with monthly intra-venous administration of pamidronate, a bisphosphonate. At present information is insufficient about when in the ML III alpha/beta disease course or at what age such treatment should be initiated [Robinson et al 2002; Sillence, personal communication]. In a consensus meeting on the use of bisphosphonate therapy in oligosaccharidoses doubts were raised regarding its usefulness in ML III gamma [MPS Society 2008]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.