http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mld

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with arylsulfatase A deficiency (MLD), the following evaluations are recommended: If the diagnosis is made presymptomatically, baseline measures of ARSA enzyme activity, urinary sulfatide excretion, and myelin integrity by MRI to monitor disease progression and evaluate the need for possible intervention Baseline assessment of development/cognitive abilities and behavior to monitor disease progression or changes with attempted therapy Examination of the peripheral nervous system Clinical genetics consultation Guidelines. See Wang et al [2011] for clinical follow up recommendations. Click here for full text.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Whether the intent is to prolong life or to let the disease run it natural course, an extended period of nursing care with changing needs can be anticipated. Supportive therapies to maximize the retention of physical and neuromuscular functions help avoid many end-stage care problems. Every effort should be made to maintain intellectual abilities, neuromuscular function, and mobility as long as possible. Provision of an enriched environment and an aggressive physical therapy program provides an optimized quality of life at all stages of the disease. The parents and/or caregivers should be aware of the likely progression of the disorder in order to anticipate decisions concerning walking aids, car seats, wheelchairs, suction equipment, swallowing aids, feeding tubes, and other supportive measures. Specific findings such as seizures and contractures should be treated with antiepileptic drugs and muscle relaxants, respectively. Gastroesophageal reflux, constipation, and drooling are common problems which may be helped by specific medications. The Evanosky Foundation has a very helpful document, Suggestions for Caring for a Child with MLD (pdf), based on their family’s experience. Because MLD affects the whole family, management should include a team of professionals to provide genetic counseling and family support through what is often a long disease process. Even children with late-infantile MLD may survive for five to ten years with progressive loss of function and continually changing care needs. Affected individuals remain susceptible to the full range of childhood and adult diseases. A pediatrician or family physician should be involved in developing comprehensive care plans. The usual regime of age-appropriate vaccinations, flu shots, nutritional support, and other typical medical care need be provided. Dental care is important and is often difficult to obtain. Pulmonary function and vision may also need attention. It is important for most families to develop a network of support services and establish contact with other families who have faced similar situations.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) or bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is the only presently available therapy that attempts to treat the primary central nervous system manifestations of MLD [Krivit et al 1999, Peters & Steward 2003, Krivit 2004]. Not all individuals with MLD are suitable candidates for these procedures and not all families are willing to undertake the risks involved. Although identification of adequately matched donors and treatments for complications of HSCT are constantly improving, it remains controversial. Substantial risk is involved and long-term effects are unclear. However, in the absence of alternative approaches, HSCT needs to be discussed with families. This is particularly important for families with more slowly progressing late-onset forms of MLD because family members may be diagnosed with MLD by biochemical or molecular genetic testing before symptoms occur. A number of reports on the experience of individual centers using HSCT have appeared over the past ten years: each involves a limited number of patients and few with MLD. They reflect evolving pretreatment conditioning and improved donor matching. HSCT failures continue; nevertheless, some improvement has been seen. Even when HSCT is successful, however, MLD progresses for a substantial period before implanted cells populate the central nervous system. The best clinical outcomes are obtained when transplantation occurs before clinical symptoms have appeared. Meuleman et al [2008] reported minimal complications in an adult who underwent reduced intensity conditioning accompanied by mesenchymal stromal cell infusion. Although the availability of hematopoietic stem cells from cord blood enhances the chances of obtaining a suitable source of donor cells, the results reported to date indicate that considerable problems remain [Martin et al 2006]. Cartier & Aubourg [2008] concluded that “…banked umbilical cord blood is still associated with significant risks of graft failure or GVHD.” In earlier studies, HSCT for MLD appeared to slow disease progression, but not alleviate peripheral nervous system manifestations [Koç et al 2002]. More recently, however, a 13-year follow up of an individual with juvenile MLD treated with HSCT reported slow disease progression in the two years following transplantation, but subsequent stabilization [Görg et al 2007]. Pierson et al [2008] reported three sibs with MLD who were transplanted with umbilical cord blood at different stages of disease: the oldest experienced disease progression; the two younger children had stable or improved neuropsychologic, neuroimaging, and nerve conduction evaluations over a two-year period of follow up. Tokimasa et al [2008] evaluated the feasibility of transplants from unrelated donors using a modified preparative procedure. Two persons with MLD showed complete donor chimerism and survived more than a year after transplantation. Smith et al [2010] followed an adult with psycho-cognitive MLD for 11 years after HSCT. “Cognitive decline, indistinguishable from the natural course of the disease…” was observed. de Hosson et al [2011] reported treatment of five patients and reviewed the literature. They conclude that in most published cases, HSCT has not been effective for MLD. Cable et al [2011] report five-year follow up of three sibs with juvenile MLD who were transplanted with unrelated umbilical cord blood. The disease progressed over the first two years post-transplant followed by stabilization of symptoms. The overall outcome depended on the disease status at the age of transplantation with the oldest showing typical disease progression. In a review of outcomes of persons with MLD undergoing HCST, Orchard & Tolar [2010] concluded that persons with later-onset disease may benefit and presymptomatic children with pathogenic variants typical for late-infantile onset (see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations) appear to have significant cognitive benefits; however, it is unclear if progressive motor problems will improve. Lanfranchi et al [2009] reviewed the therapeutic use of stem cells of various origins in a variety of conditions including MLD. HSCT in a presymptomatic neonate has been reported, but complications were encountered and disease progression was not halted [Bredius et al 2007]. For further information on the specific nursing care requirements for those with MLD who undergo HCST, see Barrell [2007].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Prevention of joint contractures by maintaining joint mobility facilitates nursing care in the later stages of the disorder. Affected individuals remain susceptible to the full range of childhood and adult diseases. The pediatrician or general care physician should be involved in developing comprehensive care plans.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: A program of periodic MRI monitoring developed by the neurologist and primary care physician: Wang et al [2011] propose guidelines for confirmatory testing and subsequent clinical management of presymptomatic individuals suspected to have MLD and other lysosomal storage diseases (click here for full text). Eichler et al [2009] propose a scoring system for brain MR images in individuals with MLD. Dali et al [2010] report that N-acetylaspartate (NAA) levels in the brains of patients with MLD as assessed by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) correlate with motor and cognitive function. This finding could be used to monitor disease progression and the effects of treatments. Not all persons with MLD show white matter lesions as the initial MRI finding. Cranial nerve enhancement by MRI in a child age 25 months with apparent MLD and without intraparenchymal white matter involvement was seen by Singh et al [2009]. Likewise, Morana et al [2009] report that cranial nerve and cauda equina nerve root enhancement by MRI may precede typical white matter abnormalities and could facilitate earlier diagnosis. Haberlandt et al [2009] present three individuals with peripheral neuropathy in whom initial MRI showed no white matter changes, but who later developed MLD. Monitoring of changes in locomotion, communication, and behavior which could indicate a need to alter care and support systems (e.g., introduction of walking aids and/or a wheelchair). A classification system for gross motor function for children with MLD has been developed and tested by Kehrer et al [2011b]; it can be used to monitor the course of the disease and should prove extremely useful in evaluating therapeutic trials. Monitoring for onset of seizures and/or contractures, which could indicate a need to change medical management and physical therapy Monitoring for behavioral changes, inappropriate emotions or actions, problems in following directions, memory loss, and/or incontinence, which indicate a need for increasing physical restriction and curtailing of independence Monitoring for difficulties in swallowing or weight loss, which trigger consideration of gastrostomy Special attention following general anesthesia or an infection with a high fever as these may trigger exacerbation of disease progression

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 While environmental factors are thought to influence the onset and severity of MLD symptoms, no specific exacerbating agents are known. Initial symptoms are often noted following a febrile illness or other stress, but it is unclear if a high fever actually accelerates progression. Excessive alcohol and drug use are often associated with later-onset MLD, but it is unclear if this is caused by the disease or is simply an attempt at self-medication in the face of increasing cognitive difficulties [Alvarez-Leal et al 2001]. Exacerbation of symptoms has been noted following anesthesia because affected individuals may have altered responses to sedatives and anesthetics [Mattioli et al 2007, Birkholz et al 2009, Cappuccio et al 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Attempts at improving the effectiveness of bone marrow transplantation (BMT) include combined therapy with either genetically engineered ARSA enzyme [Martino et al 2005] or mesenchymal stem cells [Koç et al 2002, Meuleman et al 2008]. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) is presently considered impractical because of the difficulty of bypassing the blood-brain barrier. Clinical testing of intravenous recombinant human enzyme was discontinued in 2010 after a Phase I/II study failed to show substantial improvement [Shire 2010]. However, different forms of human ARSA enzyme are now available, and animal studies suggest that it may be a useful supplement in other therapies [Martino et al 2005, Matzner et al 2005]. Schröder et al [2010] examined N-linked glycans on recombinant ASAs produced under differing culture conditions and concluded that the enzymes used in various clinical trials may have had different uptake properties. Gene therapy. A large number of papers have been published over the past ten years on experimental gene therapies for arylsulfatase A. These are reviewed by Biffi & Naldini [2007], Sevin et al [2007], Biffi et al [2008b], Gieselmann [2008]. Sevin et al [2009], Faust et al [2010], Gieselmann & Krägeloh-Mann [2010], Sevin et al [2010], and Biffi et al [2011]. Piguet et al [2009] investigate intracerebral AAVrh.10 as a possible gene therapy vector for MLD. Piguet et al [2010] considered brain-directed gene therapies for MLD. Colle et al [2010] injected an adeno-associated virus vector containing human ARSA into the brains of non-human primates and found that the enzyme was expressed without adverse effects, suggesting that a similar approach could be possible in persons with MLD. Preliminary results of a human gene replacement trial have recently been reported. The treatment appeared to be effective over an 18-24 month follow up period in the three presymptomatic affected individuals. Some concerns have been raised about the long-term safety of this approach, but the results are encouraging [Biffi et al 2013, Flight 2013, Rothe et al 2013, Verma 2013]. 
            Mouse model of MLD Viral vectors for introducing ARSA into the enzyme-deficient mouse model have been investigated [Matzner & Gieselmann 2005]. Miyake et al [2010] examined the effectiveness of bone marrow cells expressing the homeobox B4 gene (HoxB4) in curing mice with MLD. These findings support the idea that hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) transduced with a HoxB4 expression vector could be used to transport therapeutic proteins into the brain. Iwamoto et al [2009] examined the feasibility of intrathecal (IT) injection of an adeno-associated viral vector expressing arylsulfatase A in MLD mice. They achieved widespread distribution of the enzyme in the brain and the reduction of sulfatides. Kurai et al [2007] observed that coexpression of the gene encoding the formylglycine-generating enzyme (deficient in multiple sulfatase deficiency) is necessary for efficient gene replacement and correction in the mouse model. 
            Other studies Matzner et al [2008] evaluated parameters affecting enzyme replacement that could be an adjunct to therapy. Capotondo et al [2007] evaluated overexpression of ARSA. Hou & Potter [2009] discuss microencapsulated brain-targeted therapy for MLD. Lagranha et al [2008] demonstrated the ability of encapsulated BHK cells overexpressing ARSA to correct the enzyme defect in fibroblasts from persons with MLD. Biffi et al [2008b] indicated that autologous hematopoietic stem cells can be genetically modified to constitutively express supra-physiologic levels of arylsulfatase A. Similarly modified stem cells obtained from an individual with MLD could become an effective source of enzyme when transplanted back into the individual. Moreover, transformed autologous cells should result in reduced transplant-related problems. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Lead has been reported to enhance secretion of ARSA enzyme by cells in culture and to lower cellular enzyme levels [Poretz et al 2000]. Minimizing lead exposure is already an important public health goal, and it is uncertain if additional steps would be useful in individuals with MLD.