http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mma

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with isolated methylmalonic acidemia, the following evaluations are recommended:

A serum chemistry panel (Na+, K+, CI–, glucose, urea, creatinine, bicarbonate, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin [T/U], triglycerides, and cholesterol); complete blood count with differential; arterial or venous blood gas; plasma ammonium and lactic acid concentration; formal urinalysis and ketone measurement; quantitative plasma amino acids; and urine organic acid analysis by gas chromatography and mass spectrometry (GC-MS)

If possible, measurement of plasma concentrations of methylmalonic acid, methylcitrate, free and total carnitine, and an acylcarnitine profile to document propionylcarnitine (C3 species) concentration

Measurement of serum vitamin B12 concentration to determine if a nutritional deficiency is present in the patient and possibly the mother (in newborns)

Biochemical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



No consensus exists among various metabolic centers regarding treatment of acute and chronic complications of methylmalonic acidemia. Recent guidelines developed by professionals across 12 European countries and the US based on rigorous literature evaluation and expert group meetings outline the current management recommendations and areas for further research [Baumgartner et al 2014].


Stabilization of critically ill individuals

Volume replacement with isotonic solutions

All IV solutions should contain glucose, preferably D10 or D12.5. If hyperglycemia develops, an insulin infusion may be needed.

The total base deficit should be followed serially with repeat electrolyte and venous or arterial blood gas measurements and corrected by hydration and bicarbonate replacement, as needed [Baumgartner et al 2014]. Adequate kcals must be delivered. Central or peripheral total parenteral nutrition (TPN), which typically contains glucose and amino acids, and in some instances, lipids, may be required. Total protein administration is usually completely withdrawn for no more than 24-48 hours and reinstated gradually depending on the patient's acid-base balance and remaining test values, including ammonia, lactic acid, and plasma amino acids among others.

Lipid infusions must be used with caution for the risk of pancreatitis.

Carnitine may be administered intravenously at 50-100 mg/kg/d bid-qid.

Urine output and serum sodium and potassium concentration need to be monitored.

Dietary protein should be reintroduced enterally as soon as is feasible given the clinical scenario and may need to be further augmented with TPN. Nasograstric or orogastric feeding should be strongly considered so that enteral feedings can be reintroduced without delay.

N-carbamylglutamate (NCG, Carbaglu®) may be considered in the event of hyperammonemia. NCG allosterically activates CPS1 (carbamyl phosphate synthetase 1), the first step of the urea cycle. It has been effective in normalizing the blood ammonia concentration in patients with a deficiency of NAGS (N-acetylglutamate synthase) and can also benefit some patients with propionic and possibly methylmalonic acidemia [Tuchman et al 2008, Ah Mew et al 2010].

Hemodialysis or hemofiltration may be required in the event of treatment failure (uncontrollable acidosis and/or hyperammonemia).

A letter given to the family to present to emergency department physicians that specifies the recommended acute management protocol should be standard of care.

Medic Alert® bracelets and emergency treatment protocols outlining fluid and electrolyte therapy should be available for all affected individuals.


Other

Aside from episodes of critical illness, patients with intercurrent illness such as viral infection or those undergoing surgery for various reasons should have aggressive fluid, metabolic, and nutritional management.

Specialists in physiatry, physical therapy, and occupational therapy can help address the complex challenges faced by patients and families, maximize functionality, and improve quality of life [Ktena et al 2015b].

Special considerations regarding choices of anesthetic agents in this patient population may apply [Ktena et al 2015a, Ruzkova et al 2015].

Most individuals require "sick day" management regimens, which typically consist of reducing or eliminating protein intake and increasing fluids and glucose to ensure delivery of adequate calories and to arrest lipolysis. Immediate hospitalization is usually required if signs suggest intercurrent infection.

Although all of the treatments discussed above may be needed in fragile individuals, they still may not prevent death, the severe sequelae of metabolic decompensation (e.g., metabolic stroke of the basal ganglia), or renal disease. The correlation and identification of treatment patterns and outcomes is needed to develop more effective management protocols for individuals with isolated methylmalonic acidemia.

Many affected individuals require gastrostomy/gastrojejunostomy tube feeding because of anorexia and vomiting to ensure caloric and fluid intake and improve growth.

Bone marrow failure during episodes of metabolic decompensation on rare occasion requires granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (GCSF).

Anemia is an expected complication of chronic renal failure and is treated with erythropoietin and eventually renal transplantation [Inoue et al 1981, Guerra-Moreno et al 2003, MacFarland & Hartung 2015].

Some children have had documented growth hormone (GH) deficiency; however, because response to GH therapy may vary, diet and GH replacement dose need to be carefully adjusted [Bain et al 1995, Al-Owain et al 2004]. The indications for GH replacement therapy and the response to GH replacement in treated individuals require further investigation.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Dietary Management



Nutrition. After stabilization, nutritional management is critical. This typically includes instituting a low-protein, high-calorie diet. When available, accurate assessment of resting energy expenditure can guide dietary and caloric prescriptions and eliminate overfeeding [Hauser et al 2011].

Natural protein needs to be carefully titrated to allow for normal growth, while avoiding an excessive propiogenic amino acid load (isoleucine, valine, methionine and threonine) into the pathway. Adjustment of dietary whole (complete)-protein intake, based on clinical and laboratory findings, is needed throughout life for these patients.

The FAO/WHO/UNU report [2007] recommended that safe levels per age group should be the aim for natural protein intake [Baumgartner et al 2014]; however, the individual protein amount prescribed will depend on growth parameters, metabolic stability, stage of renal failure, and other factors. A propiogenic amino acid-deficient formula (e.g., Propimex®-1/2,, XMTVI-1/2, OA-1/2) and protein-free formula (e.g., Pro-Phree®, Duocal®) are given to some individuals to provide extra fluid and calories. As the infant grows, the total protein load is slowly reduced, based on growth, plasma amino acid concentrations, and plasma and urine methylmalonic acid concentrations.

Of note, in patients with low protein tolerance, severe restriction of propiogenic amino acid precursors (isoleucine, valine, methionine, and threonine) can produce a nutritional deficiency state. Furthermore, an iatrogenic essential amino acid deficiency can be induced by the relatively high leucine intake through the MMA formulas that can negatively affect long-term growth and possibly other outcomes [Manoli et al 2016b]. Medical foods should be used in moderation with the relative intake of natural protein to propiogenic amino-acid deficient formula not exceeding a ratio of 1:1. Isolated valine or isoleucine supplementation should be avoided.

These dietary guidelines do not apply for patients with CblC deficiency, a separate disorder in the pathway [Manoli et al 2016a].

Hydroxocobalamin injections. 1.0-mg injections every day to every other day are usually required in individuals who are vitamin B12 responsive. The regimen of B12 injections needs to be individually adjusted according to the patient's age and, possibly, weight.

Carnitine can be given at a dose of 50-100 mg/kg/day, up to approximately 300 mg/kg/day. As a dietary supplement, carnitine may replace the free carnitine pool and enhance the conjugation and excretion of propionylcarnitine. The contribution of propionylcarnitine excretion to the total propionate load is, however, small. The relief of intracellular CoA accretion may be the mechanism by which carnitine supplementation benefits some individuals.

Antibiotics. A variety of antibiotic regimens to reduce the production of propionate from gut flora can be used:

Oral neomycin, 250 mg by mouth 4x/day, was the original regimen reported by Snyderman et al [1972].

Metronidazole at 10-15 mg/kg/day has also been reported.

The intervals at which affected individuals are treated may vary, but a typical course is one week to ten days of treatment per one to three months.

Although oral antibiotics reduce the propionate load that derives from gut flora in affected individuals, chronic antibiotic therapy is not innocuous; it introduces the risk of repopulation of the individual with resistant flora. This could pose a serious infectious threat and could be especially dangerous to individuals with isolated methylmalonic acidemia, since most deaths are related to metabolic decompensation, often precipitated by infection.

Response to antibiotic administration should be determined in treated persons by demonstrating either a decrease in whole body output of methylmalonic acid on antibiotic therapy by a timed urine collection or a decrease in the plasma methylmalonic acid concentration compared to the baseline value for that individual.

Rotating antibiotic regimens may be considered in some persons.

Antioxidants. One individual with isolated methylmalonic acidemia who was documented to be glutathione deficient after a severe metabolic crisis responded to ascorbate therapy [Treacy et al 1996]. Several recent studies document increased oxidative stress, glutathione depletion, and specific respiratory chain complex deficiencies in persons with the mut0 enzymatic subtype with methylmalonic acidemia [Schwab et al 2006, Atkuri et al 2009, Chandler et al 2009, de Keyzer et al 2009, Manoli et al 2013], suggesting a potential benefit of treatment with antioxidants or other mitochondria-targeted therapies in these patients.

A regimen of coenzyme Q10 and vitamin E has been shown to prevent progression of acute optic nerve involvement in a patient with MMA [Pinar-Sueiro et al 2010] and was shown to attenuate the progression of kidney disease in a mouse model of MMA [Manoli et al 2013].

Organ Transplantation



The number of individuals who have undergone liver and/or kidney transplantation, the detailed effects on the underlying metabolic disorder, and the overall outcome in those undergoing this procedure have yet to be determined [Sloan et al 2015]. Inclusion of enzymatic and genotype information in case series of transplanted patients will allow better comparisons of the outcomes and genotype-phenotype associations that could inform decisions about the indication and timing of transplantation in individual cases.

Liver transplantation. Because most of the metabolic conversion of propionate occurs in the liver, replacing the liver could contribute enough enzyme activity to avert metabolic decompensation. Liver transplantation has been shown to largely protect against metabolic instability but is not curative, and individuals with isolated MMA remain at risk for long-term complications of MMA including renal disease, basal ganglia injury, and neurologic complications [Chakrapani et al 2002, Nyhan et al 2002, Kaplan et al 2006, Vernon et al 2014]. To date, more than 35 individuals with isolated methylmalonic acidemia have undergone living donor or cadaveric, orthotopic, or partial liver transplantation or combined liver-kidney transplantation (>20 patients) [van't Hoff et al 1998, van't Hoff, McKiernan et al 1999, Kayler et al 2002, Nyhan et al 2002, Hsui et al 2003, Kasahara et al 2006, Morioka et al 2007, McGuire et al 2011, Niemi et al 2015].

The underlying biochemical parameters and the frequency of metabolic decompensation improved significantly in individuals undergoing liver transplantation despite persistent metabolic abnormalities [Nyhan et al 2002, Kaplan et al 2006, Niemi et al 2015], probably as a result of increased extrahepatorenal methylmalonic acid production primarily from the skeletal muscle [Chandler et al 2007].

Following liver transplantation, some individuals continued to have progressive renal failure as well as high CSF concentrations of methylmalonic acid [Nyhan et al 2002, Kaplan et al 2006].

Neurologic complications post-transplant, including globus pallidus injuries [Chakrapani et al 2002, Cosson et al 2008, McGuire et al 2011] suggest that adequate protein restriction and supportive care should be continued after the transplantation.

Earlier transplantation particularly for individuals with mut0 (who are very fragile) is gaining support as surgery techniques and outcomes improve [Niemi et al 2015, Spada et al 2015]. The choice of the kind and timing of the indicated transplant procedure remains challenging for families and treating physicians [Sloan et al 2015]. In the long term, the details regarding development of renal disease, optic nerve atrophy, and neurologic complications will be most important.

Kidney transplantation. Some individuals have received only renal allografts [Van Calcar et al 1998, Lubrano et al 2001, Coman et al 2006, Cosson et al 2008, Clothier et al 2011].

One of the first reports on isolated renal transplantation in mut0 methylmalonic acidemia was claimed to provide enough enzyme activity to normalize methylmalonic acid excretion and allow for increased dietary protein tolerance; however, it was later determined that that patient had cblA deficiency and responded to vitamin B12. Thus, this individual, who has a much milder case, is not representative of the outcomes of isolated renal transplantation in individuals with severe MMA subtypes (mut0 or cblB) [Lubrano et al 2001, Lubrano et al 2007, Lubrano et al 2013].

Elective kidney transplantation, even before the onset of renal disease, has been advocated as a form of “cell therapy” to help stabilize individuals with mut0 MMA [Brassier et al 2013]. However, one patient died after developing hepatoblastoma, neurologic deterioration accompanied by CSF lactic acidosis, and multiorgan failure; a second patient developed progressive neurologic symptoms; and two others developed metabolic decompensations post transplant. Long-term follow up is necessary to determine if this is a safe alternative to liver transplantation or liver-kidney transplantation, especially in persons with severe mut0 MMA.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Frequent monitoring of plasma amino acids is necessary to avoid deficiencies of essential amino acids (particularly isoleucine, valine, and methionine) as a result of excessive protein restriction and the development of acrodermatitis-enteropathica-like cutaneous lesions in methylmalonic aciduria, as in other organic acidurias (glutaric aciduria-I) and amino acid disorders (maple syrup urine disease) [De Raeve et al 1994].

Low plasma amino acids can reflect low natural protein intake, imbalanced intake of branched chain amino acid from use of metabolic formulas, or effects of chronic acidosis on branched chain amino acid metabolism [Manoli et al 2016b].

Surveillance



During the first year of life, infants may need to be evaluated as frequently as every week. No guidelines regarding the recommended type or frequency of laboratory testing have been published.

The following should be monitored on a regular six-month to one-year basis or more frequently if the patient is unstable and requires frequent changes in management:

Plasma amino acids

Plasma and urine MMA levels

Serum acylcarnitines and free and total carnitine levels

Chemistry: Na+, K+, CI–, glucose, urea, creatinine, bicarbonate, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin (T/U), triglycerides, and cholesterol

Liver, kidney, and bone health

Bone marrow indices

Monitoring of kidney function periodically with creatinine, cystatin-C, and, if available, studies of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) (e.g., iohexol plasma decay), in addition to imaging of the kidneys, will allow for early referral to nephrology and appropriate timing of renal transplantation when needed [van't Hoff et al 1999, Kruszka et al 2013]. Combined equations based on creatinine and cystatin-C are expected to reflect more accurately the kidney function in this patient population [Schwartz et al 2009].

Regular ophthalmology and audiology evaluations to screen for optic nerve thinning/pallor and hearing loss [Authors, unpublished observations] are recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



The following should be avoided:

Fasting. During acute illness, intake of adequate calories is necessary to arrest/prevent decompensation.

Stress

Increased dietary protein

Supplementation with the individual propiogenic amino acids valine and isoleucine, as they directly increase the toxic metabolite load in patients with disordered propionate oxidation [Nyhan et al 1973, Hauser et al 2011, Manoli et al 2016b]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Depending on the genotype and phenotype of the proband, evaluation of sibs at risk should be performed using biochemical testing with treatment instituted as soon as possible if a sib is affected. Molecular genetic testing (if the pathogenic variants in the family are known) or cellular enzymology typically can further confirm the results of biochemical studies. Prenatal diagnosis of at-risk sibs may allow for prompt treatment of affected newborns at the time of delivery.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Oral and intramuscular vitamin B12 has been administered to women pregnant with a fetus with vitamin B12-responsive MMA, resulting in decreased maternal MMA urine output [Ampola et al 1975, van der Meer et al 1990]. Despite these observations, maternal vitamin B12 supplementation for isolated MMA needs further study.

Despite high maternal MMA levels, fetal growth and development were normal for all reported pregnancies of women with MMA [Wasserstein et al 1999, Deodato et al 2002].

Complications observed in pregnancies of women with MMA can include acute decompensation or hyperammonemia, deterioration of renal function, and obstetric complications including preeclampsia, preterm delivery, and cæsarean section [Raval et al 2015].

Therapies Under Investigation



Carefully designed clinical studies are required to evaluate the efficacy of antioxidant regimens in patients with MMA.

Gene therapy. Preliminary studies in human-derived hepatocytes and animal models of methylmalonic acidemia suggest a potential benefit of gene therapy [Chandler & Venditti 2008, Carrillo-Carrasco et al 2010, Chandler & Venditti 2010, Chandler & Venditti 2012, Sénac et al 2012]. The effect of that therapeutic approach in patients and especially on the long term complications of methylmalonic acidemia remains to be elucidated in appropriate clinical studies.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.