http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mngie

Management



Evaluations at Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in a proband with MNGIE (mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy) disease, the following are recommended:

EMG/NCV

Brain MRI

EKG

Ophthalmologic evaluation

Audiologic evaluation

Assessment of hepatic function, renal function, plasma concentrations of amino acids, and serum concentration of lactate and pyruvate

GI evaluation, which depends on the symptoms and may include abdominal films, abdominal CT, upper GI contrast radiography, esophagogastroduodenoscopy, sigmoidoscopy, liquid phase scintigraphy, and antroduodenal manometry. Radiologic studies may show hypoperistalsis, gastroparesis, dilated duodenum, and diverticulosis. Small bowel manometry shows reduced amplitude of contractions.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Cooperation among multiple specialties including neurology, clinical genetics, nutrition, gastroenterology, pain management, psychiatry, and physical/occupational therapy helps with timely detection and treatment of the various aspects of multi-organ dysfunction. Once symptoms appear, treatment is primarily supportive.

Management of GI dysfunction can include the following:

Early attention to swallowing difficulties and airway protection, especially in the most severely affected individuals

Trial of dromperidone for nausea and vomiting

Nutritional support including (when necessary) bolus feedings, gastrostomy tube placement, and total parenteral nutrition

Antibiotic therapy for intestinal bacterial overgrowth, a complication of dysmotility

Celiac plexus block with bupivicaine. This has been successful in reducing pain by interrupting visceral afferent pain sensation and increasing GI motility by inhibiting sympathetic efferent activity to the upper abdominal viscera and much of the small bowel [Teitelbaum et al 2002]. Splanchnic nerve block has been used successfully to reduce abdominal pain [Celebi et al 2006].

Complex medication regimens that include amitriptyline, nortriptyline, and gabapentin for relief of neuropathic symptoms, which are difficult to treat

Specialized schooling arrangements, typically necessary for children and young adults

Physical therapy and occupational therapy to help preserve mobility. Activity as tolerated should be encouraged.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Establishing the correct diagnosis of MNGIE disease may help avoid unnecessary exploratory abdominal surgeries, risks associated with anesthesia, and inappropriate therapies.

The approximately 20% of individuals with MNGIE disease who have hepatopathy may be at increased risk for worsening hepatic dysfunction caused by medications metabolized by the liver and as a result of total parenteral nutrition. Therefore, medications that are primarily metabolized in the liver should be used with caution.

Attention to swallowing abnormalities associated with oropharyngeal muscle dysfunction may help decrease the risk for aspiration pneumonia.

Early attention to diverticulosis can help prevent complications such as ruptured diverticula and fatal peritonitis.

Surveillance



Breath test to screen for bacterial overgrowth is recommended.

Surveillance should be individualized based on symptoms and organs affected.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Avoid drugs that interfere with mitochondrial function; these include valproate, phenytoin, chloramphenicol, tetracycline, and certain antipsychotic medications [Shoffner 2008].

Medications primarily metabolized in the liver should be used with caution [Finkenstedt et al 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Molecular genetic testing if the TYMP pathogenic variants in the family are known;

Measurements of thymidine phosphorylase enzyme (See Establishing the Diagnosis, thymidine phosphorylase enzyme) activity or plasma concentrations of thymidine and deoxyuridine (see Establishing the Diagnosis, Plasma concentrations of thymidine and deoxyuridine) if the TYMP pathogenic variants in the family are not known.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Normalization of intracellular thymidine concentrations could reduce the rate of the mtDNA damage, which progressively increases in an individual over time. Possible future treatments include decreasing plasma thymidine concentration by reducing renal reabsorption of thymidine (i.e., blocking the Na+/thymidine transporter), by dialysis, and by enzyme replacement therapy (ERT).

Approaches to ERT include allogeneic stem cell transplantation (AHSCT) [Hirano et al 2006, Rahman & Hargreaves 2007], carrier erythrocyte entrapped thymidine phosphorylase [Moran et al 2008], and platelet transfusion.

AHSCT produced nearly full biochemical correction of the deoxythymidine and deoxyuridine imbalances in blood and clinical improvements after successful engraftment of donor cells; however, high morbidity and mortality (16/25 patients died after AHSCT) precludes general use of this therapy for MNGIE disease [Hirano et al 2006, Halter et al 2015, Peedikayil et al 2015].

Polymeric enzyme-loaded nanoparticles are being explored for use in MNGIE disease but have not been used in humans [De Vocht et al 2009].

Platelet transfusion produced only transient reductions in blood nucleosides [Lara et al 2006].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other



Supplements like coenzyme Q10, vitamin K, vitamin C, riboflavin, niacin, and other compounds have no proven efficacy and do not change the natural history of the disease [Shoffner, personal observation].

Although plasma concentration of thymidine can be reduced by hemodialysis, the plasma concentration becomes elevated again in about three hours [Spinazzola et al 2002]. Improvement of symptoms like vomiting and abdominal pain was reported with peritoneal dialysis [Yavuz et al 2007]. No change in blood nucleoside levels was observed.