

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with multicentric osteolysis nodulosis and arthropathy (MONA), the following evaluations are recommended: Complete skeletal survey Evaluation by an orthopedic surgeon, rheumatologist, and physical therapist to assess joint range of motion Cardiac evaluation, including echocardiogram Eye examination Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment is supportive. 
            Osteopenia and osteolysis At present no specific therapy can alleviate the progressive osteopenia. Assure that daily requirements of vitamin D and calcium are met. Pamidronate is probably not effective [Phadke et al 2007]. Steroids and immunosuppressants have been used without much benefit and are best avoided given their side effects [Al-Mayouf et al 2000, Zankl et al 2007, Tuysuz et al 2009, Castberg et al 2013, Ekbote et al 2014]. 
            Joints Physical therapy may slow the rate of development of contractures and prolong mobility. Surgical release of contractures may not help [Author, personal observation]. Aids to ensure mobility (wheelchair and walking aids) may be needed as the disease progresses. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may not provide sufficient relief. Referral to a rheumatologist or pain clinic may be beneficial to develop an individual pain management plan. Cardiac manifestations. Provide medical or surgical interventions as appropriate.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Annual assessment of joints by a rheumatologist or orthopedic surgeon Follow up of congenital heart defects as per the treating cardiologist

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid physical trauma to reduce the risk of fractures.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 No information on pregnancy management and outcomes is available.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.