

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 Urgent referral to an oncologist for evaluation of cytopenias and bone marrow abnormalities that appear prior to the development of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) or myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is indicated. Laboratory studies for hematologic status and hemoglobin F levels, as well as cytogenetic studies in unstimulated peripheral blood are recommended. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

 The goal of management in familial monosomy 7 is early diagnosis so that definitive therapy with bone marrow transplantation (BMT) can be initiated prior to the emergence of a leukemic clone. Once transformation into AML occurs, the probability that BMT will fail to cure the disease increases significantly. Any child or young adult with detectable monosomy 7 in combination with cytopenias and marrow dysplasia should, therefore, proceed to BMT as soon as possible, unless rising blast count warrants cytoreductive chemotherapy prior to transplant. Since BMT is the only effective treatment for the management of hematologic disease and the familial status of the disorder may not be known, rigorous evaluation of related donors is strongly suggested. The suitability of sibs who are potential bone marrow donors may be evaluated with appropriate hematologic and cytogenetic studies to rule out bone marrow disease associated with familial monosomy 7. However, given that the underlying germline pathogenic variant may not be known, a matched sib donor may not be an ideal candidate (unless much older than the affected individual and with no evidence of hematologic disorders) and an unrelated donor may be more suitable. Monosomy 7 in children with de
novo AML (i.e., with no clinical history of MDS, myeloproliferative disorder, or exposure to potentially leukemogenic therapies or agents) has an adverse prognosis, and thus children with monosomy 7 AML are treated on high-risk AML protocols and offered bone marrow transplantation in first remission [Hasle et al 2007].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Individuals with monosomy 7 and certain underlying bone marrow failure syndromes including Fanconi anemia, dyskeratosis congenita, and Shwachman-Diamond syndrome have increased sensitivity to chemotherapy and radiation doses used in conventional ablative BMT approaches, and therefore require reduction in conditioning intensity. For individuals with monosomy 7 but without these above conditions, data remain too limited to determine whether standard protocols for ablative therapy prior to BMT should be modified.

Surveillance

 If transplant therapy is not pursued due to lack of donor availability or family preference, annual monitoring of bone marrow karyotype and FISH for chromosome 7, hematologic status, and hemoglobin F levels should be coordinated by specialists in oncology and bone marrow transplantation. The goal is to identify bone marrow abnormalities (cytopenias and bone marrow dysplasia) prior to the development of AML or MDS by annual monitoring of cytogenetic studies in unstimulated peripheral blood, hematologic status, and hemoglobin F levels.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Because the goal of management in familial monosomy 7 is early diagnosis for initiation of BMT prior to the emergence of a leukemic clone, it is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk including sibs and potentially maternal first cousins, based on kindreds described in Mode of Inheritance. In sibs and cousins of individuals with a history of familial monosomy 7, signs and symptoms that cannot be accounted for otherwise should be evaluated by their physicians as potential early indications of the cytopenias and bone marrow dysplasia which appear prior to the development of AML or MDS. To evaluate sibs at risk, perform cytogenetic studies/chromosomal microarray (CMA) on bone marrow or unstimulated peripheral blood (FISH and/or conventional cytogenetics), hematologic studies, and hemoglobin F assessment. If these are normal, repeat of hematologic studies on a yearly basis is reasonable, followed by chromosomal studies if abnormalities are detected. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.