

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Manitoba oculotrichoanal (MOTA) syndrome, the following are recommended: Ophthalmologic evaluation Surgical evaluation of omphalocele and umbilical hernia, if present, and of anal abnormalities ENT (ear-nose-throat) evaluation for bifid nose/notched nares Plastic surgery evaluation Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 A multidisciplinary team comprising a clinical geneticist, general surgeon, ophthalmologist, otolaryngologist, plastic surgeon, and social worker is preferred for optimal management of individuals with MOTA syndrome. Treatment consists primarily of surgical intervention with procedures tailored to the specific needs of the individual. 
            Eye anomalies
           Colobomas of the upper eyelids and synechiae are managed conservatively with intensive ocular lubrication to avoid exposure keratopathy before surgery is performed. Anophthalmia/microphthalmia and cryptophthalmos may warrant surgical intervention and insertion of prostheses to facilitate the development of the ocular region [Seah et al 2002]. Visual impairment, such as refractive errors, may be associated with colobomas and corneopalpebral synechiae. Notched or bifid nose. Rhinoplasty may be performed for cosmetic purposes. Omphalocele and umbilical hernia may be managed conservatively or by surgery. To date, all individuals with MOTA syndrome who have been managed surgically have tolerated the procedure well without procedure-related complications. Anal stenosis is generally managed by serial dilatations. Anteriorly placed anus is managed conservatively or with surgical intervention, as determined on a case-by-case basis. Psychosocial support may be indicated for the parents and the affected child.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.