http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mpd1

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Laing distal myopathy, the following evaluations are recommended: A full neurologic history and examination at presentation, with particular reference to early gross motor milestones. The examination should particularly note tightening of the tendo Achilles (Figure 1) and the pattern of muscle weakness. As severe cardiac manifestations are a feature in one third of individuals with Laing distal myopathy, an electrocardiogram and echocardiogram should be performed as a baseline. Electromyography/nerve conduction studies Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Physiotherapy assessment with particular reference to preventing or treating tightening of the tendo Achilles is very useful. In persons with more advanced disease, lightweight splinting of the ankle (e.g., with an ankle-foot orthosis) may be recommended. The cardiomyopathy may respond to ACE inhibitors or other medication. Cardiac consultation is recommended. Kyphoscoliosis may be treated with surgical stabilization of the spine. There is no treatment for spinal rigidity.

Surveillance

 After establishing the diagnosis (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis) and instituting the indicated therapies (see Treatment of Manifestations), annual review is recommended. Additional recommendations include: Spinal review for evidence of scoliosis and/or kyphoscoliosis, especially during the years of rapid growth in adolescence; Repeat electrocardiogram and echocardiogram if symptoms of cardiac insufficiency occur; Respiratory function and assessment if symptoms suggest either sleep apnea or sleep-related respiratory insufficiency.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.