

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA (MPS IVA), the following evaluations are recommended [Hendriksz et al 2013, Solanki et al 2013, Hendriksz et al 2015]: Baseline neurologic examination to assess for signs of spinal cord compression 
                Plain radiographs
               Baseline radiographs of the cervical spine, including anterior-posterior (AP), neutral lateral, and flexion-extension views Baseline AP and lateral radiographs of the entire spine Baseline AP and frog leg lateral radiographs of the pelvis Baseline AP standing radiographs of the lower extremities; in individuals who are able to stand independently and have signs of lower extremity misalignment, baseline standing lower extremity alignment radiograph from hip to ankle 
                MRI
               Baseline MRI of the entire spine (neutral position) focusing on potential sites of cord compression (occipitocervical, cervicothoracic, and thoracolumbar) Flexion-extension MRI of the cervical spine when clinically indicated – for example, if cervical spine instability is suspected on plain radiographs: Because MRI is usually performed under sedation or anesthesia, cervical spine radiographs should be obtained prior to anesthesia to evaluate for upper cervical spine instability. In individuals with cervical spine instability suspected on plain film or those with inconclusive radiographic findings, flexion-extension cervical spine MRI can be used to evaluate for cord compression. Flexion-extension MRI can identify dynamic changes in canal diameter leading to cord compression. Mackenzie et al [2013] demonstrated that cervical spine flexion-extension MRI under sedation/anesthesia in children with skeletal dysplasia was safe under adequate supervision and the result was useful for surgical decision making. Evaluation by: A physiatrist (i.e., specialist in physical medicine and rehabilitation [PM&R]) to assess mobility and autonomy. Endurance tests including six-minute walk test (6MWT) or timed 25-foot walk test (T25FW) in patients with limited ambulation have been used to evaluate functional status of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal, and nervous systems. 6MWT and T25FW should be performed at the time of diagnosis. A physical therapist to assess joint range of motion and mobility An occupational therapist to assess activities of daily living such as the functional dexterity test (FDT). Baseline upper extremity strength assessments should be performed, including grip strength assessed by dynamometer and pinch strength assessed by a pinch meter [White et al 2014]. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram. If coronary artery involvement is suspected, noninvasive stress imaging should be performed [Braunlin et al 2011, Hendriksz et al 2013]. Baseline pulmonary function and polysomnography, with evaluation by a pulmonologist Audiology evaluation Dental evaluation Ophthalmology evaluation to assess visual acuity and intraocular pressure; slit lamp examination and posterior segment examination for retinopathy Plotting of height and weight on growth charts specific for MPS IVA [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008] Pain assessment and quality of life questionnaires

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management of individuals with MPS IVA is best undertaken by the following multiple specialists, coordinated by a physician specializing in the care of individuals with complex medical problems: Physiatrist (specialist in physical medicine and rehabilitation [PM&R]) to optimize mobility and autonomy Physical therapist to optimize mobility Occupational therapist to optimize autonomy Psychological support to optimize coping skills and quality of life Educational professions to optimize learning in a medically fragile individual Consideration of referral to family therapy to help normalize the experience for the affected individual, parents, sibs, and extended family members Home care for affected individuals with multiple medical equipment needs Hospice for end-of-life care

Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT)

 Recombinant human GALNS ERT (elosulfase alfa, or Vimizim™) was approved by the FDA in February 2014. The recommendation dose is 2 mg/kg/week intravenous. Although the treatment with ERT is not curative, ERT could improve endurance and overall quality of life. Premedication (30-60 minutes prior to each enzyme infusion) with a non-sedating antihistamine (if possible) with or without antipyretics is recommended to prevent infusion-associated reactions. A Phase 3 clinical trial demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in the 6MWT distance in the 2 mg/kg weekly dose group compared to the placebo group. The 3-minute stair climb test (3MSCT) and respiratory function were improved with the treatment but the differences were not statistically significant. The long-term effects of this treatment on the skeletal features of MPSIVA are not yet known (see Therapies Under Investigation). The efficacy of ERT in improving pathology in the musculoskeletal system may be limited because of poor biodistribution of the enzyme in avascular tissue.

Musculoskeletal

 For published orthopedic management guidelines, see White et al [2014]. The level of physical activity should be monitored by specialists in orthopedic surgery, neurology, physiatry, and physical therapy to optimize mobility while preventing joint injury, joint misalignments, and cervical cord damage. Upper extremities. Non-operative interventions, such as external wrist splints, may be considered. Surgical intervention, including partial or complete wrist fusion, may be necessary to stabilize wrist range of motion. Knee and ankle valgus. Lower extremity malalignment associated with progressively poor mechanical alignment and decreasing endurance requires intervention; however, no absolute indications for intervention exist. Growth modulation, also called guided growth (temporary surgical tethering of the growth plate to allow gradual correction of the deformity) or realignment osteotomies have been successful [Dhawale et al 2012, White et al 2014]. Early detection and evaluation may allow surgical tethering of the growth plate to treat mild-to-moderate lower extremity angular deformities in children with open physes (growth plates). Typically this procedure is less invasive and allows for easier recovery than realignment osteotomies. Once the growth plates close, distal femoral and proximal tibial osteotomies are needed to acutely or gradually (with the use of external fixators) correct lower extremity malalignment. Ankle malalignment is often corrected by a distal tibial osteotomy with distal tibial screw hemiepiphyseodesis [reviewed in Tomatsu et al 2011]. Hip dysplasia. Surgery can manage pain and alignment and permit optimal mobility. Hip reconstruction includes either femoral or acetabular osteotomy for mild cases or combined acetabular and femoral osteotomy for severe cases. Augmentation of acetabular bone stock and customized implants by using cortical grafts from the inner table of the ilium are usually required due to a shallow acetabulum [White et al 2014]. Total hip arthroplasty may be required in young adults experiencing significant hip pain which cannot be corrected by reconstructive techniques. Odontoid hypoplasia. When upper cervical spine instability is documented or when clinical findings of cervical myelopathy are present, occipito-cervical or upper cervical decompression and fusion are required to stabilize the upper cervical spine and relieve cervical cord compression. To minimize neurologic injury and maximize function, intervention in children is recommended when radiographic signs of cervical compression are present, even in the absence of symptoms. Affected individuals undergoing surgical fusion typically do well; minor secondary complications can include pin site infections, pressure sores, and long-term difficulty with endotracheal intubation. Note: It is important for clinicians to be aware that cervical myelopathy from upper cervical instability may result in deteriorating endurance and worsening gait. If myelopathy is suspected, obtain cervical spine radiographs and MRI (see Surveillance). The affected individual should be referred for evaluation by a pediatric orthopedic surgeon or neurosurgeon at a tertiary care facility. Lumbar spine malalignment. Thoracolumbar kyphosis (resulting from vertebral hypoplasia) may be progressive and symptomatic. When kyphosis is less than 45 degrees, the risk of progressive deformity is less than with a greater curve, but warrants clinical and radiographic monitoring. When kyphosis exceeds 45 degrees, progression is likely. Although extensive bracing with an orthosis or a cast does not prevent progression of the thoracolumbar kyphosis, it may delay the need for surgical intervention during a period of growth and development. Anterior and posterior circumferential spinal fusion are indicated if one or more of the following are present: Progressive thoracolumbar kyphosis greater than 70 degrees Uncontrolled back pain Neurologic changes related to spinal stenosis

Cardiac

 Elevated heart rates could indicate a compensation mechanism, secondary to small left ventricular diameter and small stroke volume; thus tachycardia treatment with beta blockers should be avoided. Valve replacement may be considered for progressive valvular problems [Hendriksz et al 2015]. Risks need to be carefully weighed for valve replacement, either mechanical (life-long use of anticoagulants) or bioprosthesis (increased risk of valve dysplasia, degradation, and calcification).

Respiratory

 Upper-airway obstruction and obstructive sleep apnea are managed by removal of enlarged tonsils and adenoids (average age 7 years [Montaño et al 2007]). Note: Even with this intervention, the rate of obstructive sleep apnea in children with a mucopolysaccharidosis is much higher than the general population; therefore, prompt clinical evaluation and referral for polysomnography are appropriate [Nashed et al 2009]. In persons with diffuse narrowing of the airway in whom adenotonsillectomy only temporally relieves upper-airway obstruction, other interventions to consider are: CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure), BiPAP (bilevel positive airway pressure), and tracheostomy. Lower-airway obstruction manifest as wheezing and recurrent infection is managed by inhaled and/or oral bronchodilators and, in some instances, corticosteroids. Restrictive lung disease is managed by supportive treatment.

Growth

 Height of children with MPS IVA is best plotted on growth charts specific for MPS IVA [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008]. Nutrition should be optimized with a balanced diet and adequate vitamin D and calcium to assure bone health.

Learning Environment

 Despite some physical limitation, individuals with MPS IVA have normal intellect and can thrive in an environment with academic and social stimulation. Children routinely attend regular class/school with assistance to prevent physical injury.

Eye

 Corneal opacification often causes reduced vision in early childhood, necessitating penetrating keratoplasty, for which the outcome can vary. Recurrence of opacities within the first year post keratoplasty has been reported, making this a temporary measure for improving quality of life [reviewed by Bothun et al 2011]. In addition, other ophthalmologic problems including glaucoma and retinopathy may limit the success of corneal transplantation. Cataract surgery may benefit those with cataracts.

Dental

 Daily oral hygiene care, fissure sealing, and adequate fluoride supplementation help prevent cavities. Orthodontic management to correct malocclusion may be necessary.

Hearing

 Because ventilation tube placement can minimize the long-term scarring associated with chronic middle-ear effusions and recurrent acute otitis media, and improve hearing in the long term, most children have ventilation tubes placed during the preschool years. At the first occasion, a long-lasting tympanostomy tube is recommended due to high risk of recurrent middle-ear effusion and the risk associated with sedation in individuals with MPS IVA [Hendriksz et al 2015]. The progressive hearing impairment observed in most individuals with MPS IVA benefits from hearing aids.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 See Treatment of Manifestations for information regarding ERT. The experience of hematopoietic stem cell therapy is very limited and has not been well studied.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Anesthesia. Procedures requiring anesthesia require considerable planning and are best performed in a facility in which anesthesiologists are experienced with the airway issues of MPS IVA, such as abnormal anatomy and GAG accumulation, unstable cervical spine, and progressive pulmonary disease (both restrictive and obstructive). Theroux et al [2012], who published the largest cohort of children with Morquio syndrome undergoing anesthesia, made specific recommendations for care during anesthesia. Preoperative assessment should include history of response to anesthesia and any evidence of airway obstruction; cardiac evaluation, including electrocardiogram and echocardiography; evaluation of respiratory function (spirometry and polysomnography); and airway fluoroscopy [Muhlebach et al 2011, Tomatsu et al 2011]. Endotracheal intubation likely includes use of a video laryngoscope, fiberoptic bronchoscope with or without a laryngeal mask airway, and a smaller endotracheal tube than expected for age or size. Although nasal intubation is an option, GAG deposits can lead to narrowing of the nasal passages and increased propensity to bleeding [Aziz et al 2011, Muhlebach et al 2011, Walker et al 2013]. Postoperative narcotic management should be judicious; multimodal analgesics and non-narcotic medications are preferable to avoid exacerbating preexisting respiratory issues, such as sleep apnea. Postoperative complications including pulmonary edema have been described [Morgan et al 2002]. Surgery. Because subacute spinal stenosis and/or dynamic spinal stenosis could lead to spinal cord injury, procedures involving cervical spine manipulation, prone positioning (including spinal surgery), and/or prolonged time under anesthesia (e.g., exceeding 45 minutes), should be considered for intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring (IONM). IONM uses somatosensory and motor evoked potentials (SSEPs or MEPs) to monitor spinal cord function [Solanki et al 2013, Walker et al 2013]. Note: While spinal infarct during surgery was reported in a few individuals with skeletal dysplasia [Tong et al 2012, Pruszczynski et al 2015], data demonstrating consistent improvement of outcome with this monitoring technology are limited [Solanki et al 2013]. Immunizations. Due to increased risk for pulmonary infection, all affected individuals should receive influenza and pneumococcal immunizations as well as routine immunizations. Bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended for those at high risk, including those with a prosthetic cardiac valve, prosthetic material used for cardiac valve repair, or previous infective endocarditis [Wilson et al 2007].

Surveillance



Individuals on ERT

 The following should be assessed before and after initiation of ERT to determine treatment efficacy: Physical and neurologic evaluation at least every six months Annual assessment of quality of life, disease burden, and endurance (see All Individuals) Annual pulmonary function tests, including maximum voluntary ventilation (MVV) and forced vital capacity (FVC) Note: (1) Changes in urine keratan sulfate (KS) levels do not correlate with efficacy of treatment; therefore, the benefit of following urine KS (or urine GAG) levels during elosulfase alfa treatment is limited. (2) The benefit of monitoring anti-elosulfase alfa antibodies is unknown.

All Individuals

 
              Assessment of quality of life, disease burden, and endurance
             Every 6-12 months: track growth, pubertal stage, and progress; optimize ambulation Pain severity assessment every six months; age-appropriate quality of life questionnaires every year Yearly, before and after surgical procedures, or as clinically indicated: endurance tests including six-minute walk test (6MWT) or timed 25-foot walk (T25FW) to evaluate functional status of the cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal, and nervous systems. Respiratory rate, pulse oximeter, and heart rate should be measured before and after the annual testing. Musculoskeletal.
White et al [2014] recommended the following guidelines for monitoring musculoskeletal involvement in those with MPS IVA (full text): Upper and lower extremities. Evaluate severity and progression of upper and lower extremity involvement at least annually. Evaluation of range of motion, grip and pinch strength, and functional assessments (e.g., functional dexterity test) of the upper extremities Assessment of lower extremity alignment, including standing AP radiographs (as clinically indicated) and AP and frog leg lateral radiographs of the pelvis to assess hip dysplasia/subluxation until skeletal maturity or when clinically indicated Spine. Neurologic examination every six months to assess for spinal cord compression [Solanki et al 2013]: For children who are reliable historians, at each clinic visit obtain a history of exercise tolerance and symptoms of myelopathy (e.g., extremity weakness; clumsiness; unsteady, changing gait; bowel or bladder dysfunction or lower back/leg pain). In those with multisegmental myelopathy, SSEPs and MEPs (if available) may provide detailed information. Perform plain radiography of the cervical spine (AP, lateral, neutral, and flexion-extension) every six months. Perform plain radiography of the spine (AP and lateral views for the thoracolumbar spine) every one to three years. Perform MRI whole spine (neutral position)* annually and flexion-extension MRI of the cervical spine every one to three years.* Neutral, flexion, and extension lateral radiographs of the cervical spine should be obtained prior to cervical MRI to assess for atlanto-occipital instability. Cardiac. Evaluate heart rate annually; perform electrocardiogram and echocardiogram every one to three years depending on disease course [Braunlin et al 2011, Hendriksz et al 2013, Hendriksz et al 2015]. 
              Respiratory
             For obstructive sleep apnea, yearly history focused on sleep patterns and sounds. Evaluation by an otolaryngologist for adenotonsillectomy. Annual in home screening sleep studies (which monitor oxygen saturation). Polysomnography every three years. To assess pulmonary function, annual MVV and FVC until children stop growing, then every two to three years. The benefit of noninvasive pulmonary function tests, impulse oscillometry, and thoracoabdominal motion analysis has been demonstrated in children with MPS IV [Rodriguez et al 2010]. Growth. Use MPS IVA-specific growth charts to monitor nutritional status [Montaño et al 2007, Montaño et al 2008]. Length/height and weight should be measured at every visit. 
              Eye
             Monitor for vision and ocular abnormalities at every visit; refer to an ophthalmologist as needed. For those with rod and cone retinal dystrophy, perform retinal examination and electroretinography (ERG) under scotopic and photopic conditions every five years [Hendriksz et al 2013]. Dental. Evaluate every six to 12 months. Hearing. Perform yearly audiogram.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Because excessive weight gain causes undue stress on the axial skeleton and may decrease the duration of independent ambulation, it is important to optimize nutrition for growth while maintaining a lean habitus. Due to small ventricular diameter and stroke volume, beta blockers should be avoided in the treatment of tachycardia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of ERT (see Treatment of Manifestations). Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known; Analysis of N-acetylgalactosamine 6-sulfatase (GALNS) enzyme activity if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 ERT (elosulfase alfa, or Vimizim™) use in mildly affected individuals is still being investigated. As reported in the MOR-008 Phase 2 clinical trial in which all participants were high functioning (defined as a mean baseline walking distance of 70%-80% of the unaffected population), ERT made little change in endurance and respiratory function tests but some positive change in exercise capacity, muscle strength, and pain. Hypersensitivity reactions occurred in 18.7% of participants. Over all, the safety profile of elosulfase alfa appears manageable and serious adverse reactions are uncommon, but further long-term safety data are being collected [Tanpaiboon 2015]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.