http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mpv17-mtdep

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with MPV17-related hepatocerebral mtDNA depletion syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended.

Hepatic

Liver function including liver transaminases (ALT and AST), GGT, albumin, total and direct bilirubin, and coagulation profile (PT and PTT)

Ultrasound examination to assess liver size and texture, and for the presence of masses

Alpha fetoprotein (AFP) to screen for hepatocellular carcinoma

Hepatology/liver transplantation consultation

Neurologic

Developmental evaluation

Neurologic consultation and comprehensive neurologic examination

Brain MRI to assess white matter and other abnormalities. The brain MRI findings can establish the degree of central nervous system involvement and serve as a baseline for monitoring the progression of the neurologic disease.

Nerve conduction velocity (NCV) to assess peripheral neuropathy. NCV can establish the degree of the peripheral nervous system involvement and serve as a baseline for monitoring the progression of the neurologic disease.

EEG if seizures are suspected

Nutritional evaluation

Plasma lactate and glucose concentration

Urinalysis and amino acids to assess for renal tubulopathy

Gastrointestinal consultation if gastrointestinal dysmotility is present

Ophthalmologic examination to assess corneal sensation and possible corneal ulcers/scaring

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Management should involve a multidisciplinary team including specialists in hepatology, neurology, nutrition, clinical genetics, and child development. Treatment of MPV17-related hepatocerebral mtDNA depletion syndrome remains unsatisfactory with a mortality rate higher than 50% (see Clinical Description, Prognosis).

Nutritional support should be provided by a dietitian experienced in managing children with liver diseases.

Prevention of hypoglycemia requires frequent feeds and avoidance of fasting. Uncooked cornstarch (1-2 grams/kg/dose) can be used to manage hypoglycemia, and it may slow but not stop the progression of the liver disease [Spinazzola et al 2008, Parini et al 2009].

Liver transplantation. Although liver transplantation remains the only treatment option for liver failure, liver transplantation in mitochondrial hepatopathy is controversial, largely because of the multisystemic involvement. Liver transplantation has been performed in about one third of affected children; the outcome has not been satisfactory, with half of the transplanted children dying in the post-transplantation period because of multi-organ failure and/or sepsis (see Clinical Description, Prognosis).

Hepatocellular carcinoma. The two children reported with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) were treated by liver transplantation. Screening for HCC using periodic hepatic ultrasound examination and serum alpha fetoprotein concentration potentially could result in earlier diagnosis, enabling liver transplantation before metastasis or local invasion occurs.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Nutritional deficiencies, for example of fat-soluble vitamins, can be prevented by ensuring adequate intake and frequent assessment by a dietitian experienced in managing children with liver diseases.

Surveillance



No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available.

The following evaluations are suggested, with frequency varying according to the severity of the condition:

Liver function tests including liver transaminases (ALT and AST), GGT, albumin, total and direct bilirubin, and coagulation profile (PT and PTT)

Hepatic ultrasound examination to screen for liver masses that might suggest HCC

Serum alpha fetoprotein (AFP) concentration

Developmental evaluation

Neurologic assessment

Nutritional assessment

Urinalysis and urine amino acids to assess for renal tubulopathy

Ophthalmologic examination

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Prolonged fasting can lead to hypoglycemia and should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.