

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 Establishing the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with maple syrup urine disease (MSUD). To determine whether an individual has either classic or intermediate MSUD, it is useful to focus on concentration ratios among the BCAAs and between leucine and other essential and non-essential amino acids. Regulated concentration ratios among the full complement of circulating amino acids are one indication of in vivo residual BCKAD enzyme activity. These ratios are normally maintained within a narrow range by balanced transport of branched-chain and other essential amino acids across common carriers (LAT1/2), intracellular transamination equilibria, and coordinated activity of multiple catabolic pathways [Boado et al 1999, Matsuo et al 2000, Killian & Chikhale 2001, Umeki et al 2002, Brosnan 2003]. The following plasma concentration ratios are the most representative of amino acid regulation: leucine:isoleucine, leucine:valine, leucine:tyrosine, leucine:phenylalanine, leucine:glutamate, and leucine:alanine (mol:mol) [Strauss et al 2006, Strauss et al 2010, Mazariegos et al 2012]. In MSUD, plasma leucine concentration has the strongest reciprocal relationship to plasma alanine and glutamine concentrations (Spearman correlation coefficient -0.86 and -0.62, respectively; p<0.0001; see Figure 1) [Strauss et al 2010]. Severe BCKAD deficiency (classic MSUD) affects amino acid homeostasis at multiple levels and causes frequent and variable disturbances of plasma amino acid concentration ratios. In milder intermediate forms of MSUD, plasma BCAAs may be chronically elevated but plasma amino acid concentration ratios tend to be preserved. Note: (1) The majority of individuals with MSUD cared for by the authors are known to harbor a classic "Mennonite" variant in BCKDHA (c.1312T>A) and, thus, newly diagnosed children are not routinely tested for residual BCKAD enzyme activity [Strauss et al 2010]. (2) It is often difficult or impossible to establish whether or not an individual has clinically important residual BCKAD enzyme activity in vivo, even when the precise pathogenic variants are known.

Treatment of Manifestations

 The following treatment considerations apply to individuals with MSUD who have pathogenic variants in the E1a, E1b, or E2 subunits of BCKAD complex. Note: Treatment recommendations do not apply to those with disease caused by pathogenic variants in the common E3 subunit. Home therapy. Dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNPH) reagent allows home detection of high urine BCKAs during metabolic decompensation. With timely detection of mild or moderate illness, many individuals can be managed safely at home by experienced providers using dietary leucine restriction, high-calorie BCAA-free "sick-day" formulas, and frequent outpatient monitoring. Vomiting is the major reason that the sick neonate or child fails home therapy. Acute decompensation. Dietary indiscretion causes plasma BCAAs to increase but only rarely results in acute decompensation and encephalopathy. In contrast, infections and injuries trigger a large endogenous mobilization of muscle protein and can precipitate metabolic crisis and hospitalization. Leading causes of hospitalization among one cohort of children with MSUD (N=15) are summarized in Table 4 [Strauss et al 2010]. Reasons for 28 Hospitalizations in 15 Infants with MSUD 
                  Strauss et al [2010] Correction of metabolic decompensation is predicated on establishing net protein accretion. This is achieved by treating the precipitating stress (e.g., infection, dehydration, pain, fever) while simultaneously delivering sufficient calories, insulin, free amino acids, isoleucine, and valine to stimulate net protein synthesis in muscle and liver. Rapid nutritional correction of leucine intoxication in older children and adults is more challenging than in young rapidly growing infants (see, e.g., Figure 2 and Figure 9) but is, nonetheless, possible with higher weight-adjusted calorie intake (see Methods of achieving these goals) [Strauss, Puffenberger, Morton, unpublished observation]. Simultaneous in-hospital management of metabolic intoxication and brain edema is complex and should be guided by an experienced metabolic specialist. Metabolic physicians may benefit from the expertise of an intensivist when administering medications such as insulin, hypertonic saline, and mannitol. Referral centers that admit individuals with MSUD who are in crisis should be able to provide parenteral BCAA-free amino acid and 1% isoleucine and valine solutions in the hospital pharmacy, as well as 24-hour monitoring of plasma amino acid concentrations. 
            The primary goals of in-hospital therapy Decrease plasma leucine concentration at greater than 750 µmol/L per 24 hrs. Provide isoleucine and valine supplementation sufficient to maintain plasma concentrations of 400-600 µmol/L during the acute phase of illness. Maintain serum sodium concentration of 138-145 mEq/L with minimal fluctuation. Avoid osmolarity changes of greater than 5 mosm/L per day or 0.25 mosm/L per hour. Maintain urine output of 2-4 mL/kg/hr and urine osmolarity of 300-400 mosm/L. Minimize exposure to hypotonic fluid sources. Anticipate and prevent iatrogenic electrolyte abnormalities associated with intravenous glucose and insulin therapy; the most commonly encountered are hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia. 
            Methods of achieving these goals Identify and treat precipitating conditions (e.g., infection, inflammation, and fever). Administer antiemetics (e.g., odansetron 0.15 mg/kg/dose) to control nausea and vomiting. Provide at least 1.25 times the weight or body surface area-adjusted estimated energy requirement (EER), with 40%-50% of calories as lipid. EER, in kcal/m2/day, is approximately 1700 for neonates, 1500 for young children, and 1200 for adults. In older children and adults with catabolic illness, calorie intakes as high as three times the EER (i.e., 6000 calories per day) are often necessary to establish net protein anabolism.Note: Hypercaloric feeding typically requires a total (enteral + parenteral) glucose delivery rate of ≥10 mg/kg/min and can result in hyperglycemia. Regular insulin is typically infused at a continuous rate of 0.05-0.10 units/kg/hour and titrated to maintain euglycemia. Patients with severe illness may require higher rates of insulin infusion to counteract the glycemic effects of circulating glucagon, cortisol, and epinephrine [Strauss, Puffenberger, Morton, unpublished observation]. Provide BCAA-free essential and non-essential amino acids: 2.0-3.5 g/kg/day. Provide specific amino acid supplements during metabolic crisis: Isoleucine and valine. 20-120 mg/kg/day each; intake is adjusted as necessary at 12- to 24-hour intervals to achieve the goals for isoleucine and valine plasma concentrations (400-600 µmol/L) and to optimize the rate of plasma leucine correction. Glutamine and alanine. Total intake: 150-400 mg/kg/day each, depending on age and clinical circumstances (Table 5). Newer MSUD medical foods are fortified with glutamine and alanine [Strauss et al 2010]; use of such products precludes the need to supply glutamine and alanine separately. Tyrosine. During acute metabolic crisis, newborns, infants, and children with MSUD can develop acute focal or generalized dystonic posturing attributed to an increased plasma leucine:tyrosine concentration ratio, restricted brain tyrosine uptake, and reduced cerebral dopamine synthesis [Morton et al 2002, Zinnanti et al 2009]. Tyrosine dissolves poorly in aqueous solution, but when supplied enterally (100-400 mg/kg/day) can rapidly reverse dystonia associated with metabolic crisis [Strauss et al 2010; Strauss & Morton, unpublished observation]. Mean and 25th to 75th Percentile Range Nutrient Intakes (per kg-day) by Age Group From Strauss et al [2010]; with permission from Elsevier Total nutritional goals can be met by combined enteral and parenteral administration. In ill neonates or children otherwise able to tolerate enteral formula, regular feeding (30-60 mL each hour) or continuous nasogastric delivery of a one kcal/mL BCAA-free MSUD formula supplemented with isoleucine and valine is an effective way to manage metabolic crises [Nyhan et al 1998, Morton et al 2002]. Control of brain edema. A decrease in blood osmolarity of more than 8 mosm/L per day can precipitate fatal brain herniation in an ill infant or child with MSUD (Figure 4). Close monitoring (preferably in an intensive care unit) is warranted. Neurologic assessments to be performed on a frequent basis to monitor for brain swelling include the following: Measure head circumference and fontanel size in neonates. Watch for signs of increased intracranial pressure including the following: Papilledema Disorientation, combativeness Depressed level of consciousness Refractory vomiting Extremity hyperreflexia Bradycardic hypertension Watch for signs of impending brain herniation including the following: Hyperactive gag Pupillary asymmetry Ophthalmoplegia Decorticate posturing Methods to minimize the possibility of brain swelling: In appropriate clinical settings, the authors recommend use of a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line in encephalopathic patients with MSUD. This allows sufficient nutritional support to be delivered without an excessive fluid volume and reduces the risk for cerebral edema. Elevate the individual's head. Assess total body sodium, potassium, and water balance at 12-hour intervals. The following clinical formula is useful for managing the serum sodium concentration [Rose & Post 1994]: Serum Na concentration equals ~([total body Na + total body K]/ total body water). Assume total body water equals ~70% body weight, 2/3 of which is intracellular and has sodium and potassium concentrations of 14 mEq/L and 140 mEq/L, respectively [Guyton & Hall 1996]. Minimize osmotic variation of the extracellular fluid in hospitalized patients by assessing weight trend, urine output, and serum and urine electrolytes every 12 hours and adjusting electrolyte and water intake accordingly [Strauss, Puffenberger, Morton, unpublished observation]. Note: Give furosemide (0.5-1.0 mg/kg/dose) as needed every six to 12 hours to oppose the urinary concentrating action of vasopressin and maintain urine osmolarity at a ceiling value of 300-400 mosm/L. This allows for brisk output of isotonic urine to compensate for the large infused volume associated with hypercaloric feeding. Methods to manage brain swelling: For weight gain, hyponatremia, or deepening encephalopathy, the authors administer [Strauss, Puffenberger, Morton, unpublished observation]: Furosemide: 0.5-1.0 mg/kg, followed by Mannitol: 0.5-1.0 g/kg over 60 minutes, followed by Hypertonic (3%-5%) saline: 2.5 mEq/kg over 60 minutes Neuroimaging. During episodes of acute encephalopathy, individuals with MSUD are typically too unstable for magnetic resonance imaging. Cranial CT scan is used to look for major indices of cerebral edema, such as decreased volume of cerebral ventricles and basal fluid spaces, or reduced gray-white discrimination (Figure 4). If there is clinical evidence of evolving brain herniation, elevate the individual's head, hyperventilate by face mask or endotracheal tube, give mannitol 1-2 g/kg and hypertonic saline 3 mEq/kg, and transfer the individual emergently to a pediatric or neurologic intensive care unit. Hemodialysis/hemofiltration. Nutritional therapy alone can effectively reduce even extremely elevated plasma concentrations of leucine in persons with MSUD of any age and under a wide variety of clinical circumstances [Morton et al 2002, Strauss & Morton 2003]. However, numerous publications have shown that renal replacement methods can achieve rapid corrections of BCAAs and BCKAs during the acute phase of MSUD crisis [Jouvet et al 1997, Schaefer et al 1999, Yoshino et al 1999, Jouvet et al 2001, Puliyanda et al 2002]. As methods of invasive leucine removal, peritoneal dialysis and venovenous hemofiltration are less effective and more dangerous than short courses of continuous hemodialysis [Schaefer et al 1999]. When hemodialysis is used to treat MSUD it must be coupled with effective nutritional management to constrain the catabolic response and prevent recurrent clinical intoxication. A combined approach to therapy, using hemodialysis with simultaneous anabolic nutritional therapy, was shown to be highly effective in one neonate with classic MSUD [Puliyanda et al 2002]. Dialysis without simultaneous management of the underlying disturbance of protein turnover is analogous to treating diabetic ketoacidosis with invasive removal of glucose and ketones rather than insulin infusion. In both conditions, effective treatment depends not only on lowering concentrations of pathologic metabolites, but also on controlling the underlying metabolic derangement. Other potential complications in hospitalized persons with MSUD: Acute pancreatitis. If clinical signs of pancreatitis (epigastric or mid-back pain, anorexia, vomiting) develop two to three days into the treatment of a metabolic decompensation, stop all enteral feeding and measure serum concentrations of lipase and amylase [Kahler et al 1994]. Treatment is supportive; persons with MSUD with pancreatitis need to be managed with special parenteral nutrition solutions until the condition abates. Infection. Monitor for and promptly treat hospital-acquired infections. Superficial and invasive Candida infections are common. Persons with MSUD are vulnerable to bacterial or fungal infection from central venous catheters.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Dietary management. The goals of dietary management for newly diagnosed infants: Normal weight gain, linear growth, and head growth Normal psychomotor development, as assessed by serial examinations and valid developmental screening tools (e.g., Denver Developmental Screening Test II, standardized intelligence testing, validated behavioral inventories) [Muelly et al 2013] Age-appropriate tolerance of leucine, isoleucine, and valine, with stable plasma BCAA concentrations and BCAA concentration ratios Avoidance of essential amino acid, fatty acid, and micronutrient deficiencies Home formula supplies include BCAA-free powder; breast milk or regular infant formula as a natural protein source; and 10-mg/mL solutions of isoleucine, valine, and leucine in distilled water. If the BCAA-free powder is not already fortified with glutamine and alanine [Strauss et al 2010], these can be given separately as a combined powder (weight ratio 3:2). Parents maintain a record of intake of calories, leucine, isoleucine, and valine and send dried blood spots by overnight mail for monitoring of amino acid concentrations. The frequency of amino acid monitoring varies by age, metabolic stability, compliance, and regional clinical practice. For rapidly growing infants, monitoring weekly or twice weekly is recommended. Of note, the frequency of amino acid monitoring correlates directly with long-term measures of intelligence [Muelly et al 2013]. Suggested clinical parameters for the asymptomatic infant or young child include the following: Normal age- and weight-adjusted energy intake Protein as essential and non-essential amino acids: 2-3 g/kg/day Appropriate leucine tolerance. The dietary requirement for BCAAs varies as a function of age, growth rate, calorie intake, illness, and residual in vivo BCKAD enzyme activity. In persons with classic MSUD (0%-2% enzyme activity), leucine tolerance in mg/kg/day is 65-85 for neonates, 20-40 for children, and 10-15 for adults (Figure 9) [Strauss et al 2010]. Isoleucine and valine supplements as needed to maintain a plasma leucine-to-valine concentration ratio (mol:mol) of 0.5 or less and a leucine-to-isoleucine ratio of approximately 2.0. Isoleucine supplements can periodically be suspended based on plasma amino acid monitoring, but continuous valine supplementation is prudent because its low affinity for the blood-brain barrier LAT1 transporter makes it especially vulnerable to competitive inhibition by leucine [Smith & Takasato 1986] and its appropriate fortification is directly related to long-term intellectual outcome [Strauss et al 2010, Muelly et al 2013]. The authors recently compiled age-specific (birth to age 4 years) nutrient intakes for Mennonite children with classic MSUD under their care. These data are presented in Table 5, which shows mean (and 25th to 75th percentile range) intakes for energy, total protein, supplemental amino acids, omega-3 fatty acids, and select minerals at different age intervals. Goals of laboratory monitoring: Plasma leucine concentration: 150-300 µmol/L with an age-appropriate intake Plasma isoleucine concentration approximately equal to plasma leucine concentration Plasma valine concentration at least twofold plasma leucine concentration Indices of calcium, magnesium, zinc, folate, selenium, and omega-3 essential fatty acid sufficiency Neuropsychiatric morbidity is most effectively addressed by presymptomatic diagnosis followed by strict and consistent metabolic control [Muelly et al 2013]. Adolescents and adults with MSUD and ADHD, depression, or anxiety respond favorably to standard psychostimulant and antidepressant medications. Thiamine treatment. The existence of "thiamine-responsive" BCKAD mutants is controversial. Nevertheless, for any person with MSUD in whom the functional consequences of the pathogenic variant(s) are unknown, a four-week trial of enteral thiamine (50-100 mg/day, divided 2x a day) is reasonable. However, it should be noted that significant changes in dietary therapy (e.g., BCAA or calorie intake) during the treatment period confounds interpretation of a specific thiamine effect. Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) is an effective therapy for classic MSUD, with removal of dietary restrictions and complete protection from decompensations during illness [Wendel et al 1999, Bodner-Leidecker et al 2000]. Through a collaboration between University of Pittsburgh Children's Hospital and Clinic for Special Children [Strauss et al 2006], 52 individuals with classic MSUD (age 1.9-20.5 years) underwent elective orthotopic liver transplantation between 2004 and 2013. Plasma leucine, isoleucine, and valine concentrations were normal within six hours after transplantation in all individuals and remained so on an unrestricted diet. Metabolic cure was reflected by a sustained increase in weight-adjusted leucine tolerance from 10-40 mg/kg/day to more than 140 mg/kg/day, normalization of plasma concentration relationships among branched-chain and other essential and non-essential amino acids, and metabolic and clinical stability during protein loading and intercurrent illnesses [Strauss et al 2006, Mazariegos et al 2012]. Risks associated with surgery and immune suppression were similar to those in other pediatric liver transplant populations and one person developed EBV-associated post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease. Currently, disease-free survival and graft survival are 100% in this cohort of 52 patients [Mazariegos et al 2012]; however, deaths and graft failures have been reported among individuals with MSUD transplanted elsewhere during the same time period [Mazariegos, unpublished observations]. Although liver transplantation does not reverse cognitive disability or psychiatric illness in individuals with MSUD [Muelly et al 2013], it does appear to arrest progression of neurocognitive impairment [Shellmer et al 2011] and prevent life-threatening cerebral edema associated with metabolic crisis [Mazariegos et al 2012].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Any trauma care or surgical procedures should be approached in consultation with a metabolic specialist.

Surveillance

 The authors recommend that infants with MSUD be evaluated by a pediatrician and metabolic specialist once monthly and have a full amino acid profile measured (either from plasma or filter paper) at least once a week. At the authors’ center, strict adherence to these guidelines by 15 Mennonite infants managed between 2005 and 2008 was associated with a 64% reduction in the overall hospitalization rate to 0.14 admissions per patient per year [Strauss et al 2010]. Children, adolescents, and adults also need to be followed closely and should ideally have amino levels monitored once per week. This is usually not practical without a “send-in” filter paper method. The Denver Developmental Screening Test II or a comparable tool is useful for monitoring development of infants and young children with MSUD. School-age children, adolescents, and adults should have neurocognitive testing if indicated by school performance or behavioral problems [Shellmer et al 2011, Muelly et al 2013]. Referral to a psychiatrist is appropriate for individuals who show signs of ADHD, anxiety, or depression.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Early diagnosis of at-risk sibs of an affected individual may allow asymptomatic infants to be managed out of hospital by experienced providers. Newborn at-risk sibs who have not undergone prenatal testing can be tested in one of two ways: Plasma amino acid analysis of a sample obtained at approximately 24 hours of life. In some laboratories, samples obtained earlier can yield false negative results. If the pathogenic variants have been identified in the family, a cord blood sample can be used for molecular genetic testing. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 With the advent of newborn screening and preventive care, more women with MSUD are surviving to child-bearing age. Successful delivery of a healthy baby is possible for women with classic MSUD. Reports include Van Calcar et al [1992] and Grünewald et al [1998]. Elevated maternal leucine plasma concentration, like elevated maternal phenylalanine plasma concentration, is likely teratogenic. If a woman with MSUD is planning a pregnancy, metabolic control should be maintained in a rigorous fashion preceding and throughout the gestation. Keeping the maternal plasma levels of the branched-chain amino acids between 100 and 300 μmol/L is compatible with delivery of a normal infant [Grünewald et al 1998]. During the development of the placenta and fetus, maternal BCAA and protein requirements increase, and frequent monitoring of plasma amino acid concentrations and fetal growth may be necessary to avoid essential amino acid deficiencies [Grünewald et al 1998]. The post-partum period is dangerous for the mother. Catabolic stress of labor, involutional changes of the uterus, and internal sequestration of blood are potential sources of metabolic decompensation [Chuang & Shih 2001]. Appropriate monitoring at a metabolic referral center is advised at the time of delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.