http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mt-mpan

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with mitochondrial membrane protein-associated neurodegeneration (MPAN), the following evaluations are recommended: Complete neurologic examination, including evaluation of ambulation, speech, and swallowing Ophthalmologic examination to assess for optic atrophy Assessment by specialists in physical, occupational, and/or speech therapy Brain MRI (T2 weighted at a minimum) if one has not been obtained within the past two years Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 The following are indicated: Pharmacologic treatment of dystonia and spasticity, including consideration of oral baclofen, trihexyphenidyl, intramuscular botulinum toxin, and a trial of intrathecal baclofen if indicated Pharmacologic treatment of parkinsonism (response to levodopa has been variable in this population) Treatment by a psychiatrist for those with significant neuropsychiatric symptoms Physical, occupational, speech, and other therapies as indicated Use of a liquid nutritional supplement to help maintain weight as needed A gastric feeding tube to help minimize weight loss (which becomes more frequent with disease progression) and to reduce the risk of aspiration pneumonia Glycopyrrolate or transdermal scopolamine patch to reduce the volume of secretions in those with excessive drooling or difficulty controlling secretions Tracheostomy as indicated for difficulty managing secretions Over-the-counter fiber supplements and/or stool softeners to treat constipation, which is likely caused by a combination of immobility, diet, and medications

Surveillance

 Patients are typically followed most closely by a neurologist for medication management and for interval assessment of ambulation, speech, and swallowing. This is often done every three to six months, but may be annual for patients who are more stable. Patients receiving dopaminergic drugs (for parkinsonism) are monitored for adverse neuropsychiatric effects; conversely, patients receiving typical or atypical dopamine antagonist agents (for psychiatric features) are monitored for the development or worsening of parkinsonism. Annual ophthalmologic examination is recommended.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has not been specifically studied in MPAN, even in case reports. DBS has become a common treatment for primary dystonia and is being used more frequently to attempt to treat the secondary dystonia in PKAN with some success. It is likely that the use of DBS in MPAN will eventually be reported. Iron chelation using deferiprone is currently under investigation in PKAN (see clinicaltrials.gov). A small phase II pilot trial in PKAN showed statistically significant reduction of brain iron by MRI evaluation; however, no change in clinical status was observed [Zorzi et al 2011]. The current double-blind, placebo controlled trial in PKAN may inform whether deferiprone treatment should be considered for MPAN. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.