http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mtm

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with X-linked centronuclear myopathy (XLCNM), the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment of pulmonary function for long-term ventilatory management, either during initial hospitalization (if presentation at birth) or after the diagnosis has been established. Ophthalmologic evaluation, either during initial hospitalization (if presentation at birth), or after the diagnosis has been established In individuals with hemolysis or unexplained anemia, osmotic fragility test to detect spherocytosis In the presence of infantile vomiting, investigation for pyloric stenosis Baseline abdominal ultrasound examination to detect peliosis hepatis (although the specific risk for subsequent bleeding if peliosis is detected is not known)

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of individuals with XLCNM is based on supportive care measures and in large part is similar to that for other neuromuscular disorders. The management of an individual with XLCNM optimally involves a team of specialists with expertise in the long-term care of individuals with neuromuscular disorders. Such teams often include a pulmonologist, neurologist, physical therapist and/or rehabilitation medicine specialist, and clinical geneticist. Of note, standard of care measures for all congenital myopathies are currently being developed. Once the specific diagnosis of XLCNM is confirmed, management may be guided by family decisions regarding continued ventilatory support for the affected family member. Families may benefit from the involvement of professionals familiar with the data concerning the overall prognosis for XLCNM. Talking with other families who have children with the disorder can be extremely helpful (see Resources). Because of the risks for aspiration pneumonia and respiratory failure in infants with moderate or severe disease, tracheostomy and G-tube feeding should be seriously considered. Even individuals with mild disease are at risk for significant morbidity and mortality from intercurrent respiratory infection and hypoventilation. For ventilator-dependent individuals, communication incorporates speech with a capped tracheostomy or Passy-Muir valve, sign language, and/or communication devices such as writing boards. Affected individuals older than age five years attend school, usually assisted by a dedicated nurse or aide, or have home-based teachers to limit exposure to infectious agents. Ophthalmologists, orthopedists specializing in scoliosis management, and orthodontists should address specific medical complications related to the underlying myopathy. Children with XLCNM and an unexpected decline in motor skills should be evaluated for a potential abnormality in neuromuscular junction function. A recent study from Robb et al [2011] identified one individual with mild XLCNM and unexplained decline in motor skills (i.e., lost ambulation) consistent with a disorder of neuromuscular junction transmission. On evaluation this individual was found to have the electrodiagnostic features of neuromuscular junction disease (electrodecrement with repetitive stimulation and jitter with single fiber EMG) but no laboratory evidence to support a co-occurring diagnosis of myasthenia gravis. Subsequent treatment with pyridostigmine resulted in rapid recovery of ambulation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Because of the risks for bleeding during or following surgery, clotting parameters should be examined prior to any surgical procedures. (Note, however, that clotting studies in two individuals were normal prior to a lethal bleeding event associated with surgery.)

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes: Annual pulmonary assessment, including pulmonary function testing if able to be performed; Polysomnography every one to three years unless symptoms of sleep-disordered breathing are present on history; Spinal examination for signs of scoliosis, particularly in late childhood and adolescence; Annual ophthalmologic exams for ophthalmoplegia, ptosis, and myopia; Assessment for dental malocclusion, with referral for orthodontia if indicated. Currently, the risk for non-neurologic events including bleeding diatheses and gastrointestinal complications is uncertain. Furthermore, the benefit of screening tests for such abnormalities has yet to be determined or systematically studied. Potential screening tests include the following: Annual blood counts [Herman et al 1999] Annual liver function test and abdominal ultrasound to address the potential risk of peliosis hepatis [Herman et al 1999]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.