http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mws

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS), the following evaluations are recommended: Baseline echocardiogram Baseline dental evaluation in early childhood Baseline ophthalmology evaluation Baseline audiology evaluation Review history for evidence of chronic constipation Review history for evidence of seizures Renal ultrasound examination to assess for structural renal anomalies Genitourinary evaluation, particularly for hypospadias and cryptorchidism in males Physical examination for pectus anomalies and foot/ankle malpositioning Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment includes the following: Dental. Referral to an orthodontist if significant dental anomalies are present Neurologic. Referral to a pediatric neurologist if signs or symptoms suggest seizures. An EEG and/or head MRI may be warranted for diagnostic purposes or refractory seizures. Standard anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) should be used, as indicated. Developmental. Educational intervention and speech therapy beginning in infancy because of the high risk for motor, cognitive, speech, and language delay Ophthalmologic. Treatment and/or following of ocular abnormalities by a pediatric ophthalmologist Cardiovascular. Referral to a cardiologist or cardiothoracic surgeon for treatment of congenital heart defects Gastrointestinal. Referral to a gastroenterologist for evaluation and treatment when chronic constipation is present; evaluation for HSCR and ultrashort HSCR. See Hirschsprung Disease Overview. Genitourinary. Referral to a urologist or nephrologist as indicated Musculoskeletal. Referral to an orthopedist for significant pectus anomalies of the chest and/or foot/ankle anomalies

Surveillance

Surveillance includes the following: Annual eye examination in childhood to monitor for strabismus and refractive errors Monitoring for the development of otitis media (OM); for those individuals with chronic OM, referral to an otolaryngologist Regular developmental assessments to plan and refine educational interventions Periodic reevaluation by a clinical geneticist to apprise the family of new developments and/or recommendations

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.