http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/myh9

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with an MYH9-related disorder (MYH9RD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Microscopic assessment of platelet count (phase contrast microscopy by a counting chamber) to determine the degree of thrombocytopenia

In individuals with bleeding episodes, complete blood count to evaluate for anemia

In individuals with anemia, serum concentration of iron and ferritin level to evaluate for iron deficiency

Audiometric evaluation

In those with severe to profound deafness, speech recognition tests

Measurement of serum concentration of AST, ALT, and GGT

Urinalysis, including measurement of 24-hour protein or protein (or albumin)/creatinine ratio on a spot urine sample, and measurement of serum concentration of creatinine

In individuals with established renal involvement, testing appropriate to the severity of renal disease

Ophthalmologic examination

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations




Bleeding tendency

Local measures are the first-line treatment for mucocutaneous bleeding and often are sufficient to control mild or moderate bleeding. Local measures include packing or endoscopic cauterization of the bleeding site for treatment of epistaxis; suturing for treatment of accidental or surgical wounds; and compression and application of gauzes soaked in tranexamic acid for bleeding from superficial wounds. Mouthwash with tranexamic acid may control gingival bleeding.

Transfusions of platelet concentrates are currently used to transiently increase platelet count. Platelet transfusions have associated risks of possible alloimmunization and subsequent refractoriness to platelet infusions, infectious diseases, and acute reactions. Thus, platelet transfusions should be limited to treatment for active hemorrhages that cannot be otherwise managed, life-threatening bleedings, and/or hemorrhages at critical sites; platelet concentrates may also be used as prophylaxis prior to surgery or other major hemostatic stresses. When available, platelets from HLA-matched donors should be used to prevent or overcome alloimmunization.

Eltrombopag. A Phase II study in 12 persons with MYH9RD and severe thrombocytopenia demonstrated that eltrombopag, an oral drug mimicking the natural hormone that stimulates platelet production, increased platelet counts and abolished bleeding tendency in most instances [Pecci et al 2010]. Thereafter, short-term eltrombopag courses have been successfully used in one affected adult prior to major surgery and in one child with MYH9RD and severe thrombocytopenia [Pecci et al 2012b, Favier et al 2013b]. At the present time, this drug is approved in the US and Europe only for individuals with some forms of acquired thrombocytopenia.

Antifibrinolytic agents. Some authors recommend the systemic administration of antifibrinolytic agents, such as tranexamic or epsilon-aminocaproic acid, to treat mild or moderate mucocutaneous bleeding [Bolton-Maggs et al 2006, Althaus & Greinacher 2009].

Desmopressin (1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin, DDAVP) shortened bleeding time in some individuals with MYH9RD [Balduini et al 1999]. Successful surgery after prophylaxis with DDAVP has been reported [Pecci et al 2014b]. As not all affected individuals respond to the treatment, a test dose is recommended to identify those who will benefit from this treatment either in future bleeding episodes or in prevention of bleeding at the time of invasive procedures.

Deafness. A total of 11 individuals with an established diagnosis of MYH9RD and severe to profound deafness have received cochlear implantations [Pecci et al 2014b, Nabekura et al 2015]. Ten of them benefited from cochlear implants; nine of them obtained restoration of practically normal hearing and verbal communication abilities.


Glomerular nephropathy

Four affected individuals with renal involvement had their proteinuria greatly reduced by treatment with angiotensin receptor blockers and/or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors [Pecci et al 2008]. It is premature to conclude whether this therapeutic approach prevents or delays the development of ESRD.

Dialysis or kidney transplantation is required in individuals with ESRD.

Cataracts. Cataract surgery remedies clouding of the lens.

Elevation of liver enzymes does not require any specific treatment.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Thrombocytopenia cannot be prevented; however, the risk of bleeding can be significantly reduced through education regarding drugs that affect platelet function (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid).

Affected individuals should be prepared for surgery or other invasive procedures with platelet transfusions, desmopressin, antifibrinolytic drugs, or eltrombopag according to the individual's platelet count and history of bleeding.

Oral contraceptives are often effective in preventing or controlling menorrhagia; however, oral contraceptives increase the risk of thrombosis, which has also been described in individuals with MYH9RD. Thus, the balance between risks and benefits associated with use of oral contraceptives should be considered [Heller et al 2006, Nishiyama et al 2008, Girolami et al 2011].

Regular dental care and good oral hygiene are essential to prevent gingival bleeding.

Surveillance



The following evaluations should be considered at the suggested maximum intervals:

Every six months. blood count in individuals with bleeding episodes to identify anemia; more frequent counts are appropriate in cases of recurrent profuse bleeding.


Every year

Urinalysis (including measurement of 24-hour protein or protein (or albumin)/creatinine ratio on spot urine sample)

Measurement of serum concentration of creatinine

For individuals with an established renal defect, referral to a nephrologist


Every three years

Audiometric evaluation. Once hearing loss is identified, the frequency of follow-up evaluations is determined by the treating hearing specialists.

Ophthalmologic evaluation. Once cataract is identified, the frequency of evaluations is determined by the treating ophthalmologist.

Measurement of serum AST, ALT and GGT

In individuals with alterations of liver enzymes, alternative causes of liver damage should be investigated.

If alternative causes are excluded, the frequency of the liver enzyme measurements depends on the severity of the alteration.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid




Bleeding tendency

Agents. Drugs that inhibit platelet function or blood coagulation:

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), especially aspirin, which are strong inhibitors of platelet aggregation

Other substances that interfere with platelet function including some antibiotics; cardiovascular, psychotropic, and oncologic drugs; drugs that affect platelet cAMP; some anesthetics; antihistamines; and radiographic contrast agentsNote: (1) Drugs that impair platelet function should be prescribed only after a careful assessment of the risks versus the benefits. (2) Physicians should try to avoid prescribing any other drugs that increase the risk of bleeding in individuals with MYH9RD. (3) Individuals with MYH9RD can develop thromboembolic events [Girolami et al 2011]. The use of antithrombotic agents (such as heparin) must be carefully balanced against the risks according to the overall clinical picture of each affected individual.

Circumstances. In individuals with moderate to severe thrombocytopenia, avoidance of activities at high risk of trauma (e.g., contact sports)


Hearing loss

Agents. Ototoxic drugs (e.g., aminoglycoside antibiotics, salicylates in large quantities, loop diuretics, some drugs used in chemotherapy regimens). These should be used only after a careful assessment of the risks versus the benefits.

Circumstances. Exposure to hazardous noise. If noise exposure cannot be avoided, use ear devices (e.g., earplugs, headphones) to attenuate intense sound.


Nephropathy

Agents that can damage renal function, including radiocontrast, antibiotics, NSAIDs, diuretics, and oncologic drugs. The balance between benefit and risk of such agents should be carefully considered, especially in individuals with established kidney involvement or with MYH9 pathogenic variants associated with high risk for kidney damage.


Cataract

Agents. Glucocorticoids and radiation therapy, which predispose to development of cataracts


Elevation of liver enzymes

Agents. In affected individuals with liver enzyme elevation, assessment of risks versus benefits before use of potentially hepatotoxic drugs

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Assessing platelet count and size in a newborn at risk for MYH9RD identifies those at risk for bleeding.

If the family-specific pathogenic variant is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to evaluate at-risk family members so that early diagnosis can inform treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Deliveries should be managed as they are in women with other forms of thrombocytopenia (MYH9RD is not usually associated with defects of platelet function). As expected, pregnant women whose thrombocytopenia and bleeding history before pregnancy are more severe have a higher incidence of delivery-related bleeding. In general, a platelet count of ≥50 x 109/L is recommended for safe delivery. Vaginal deliveries in women with severe thrombocytopenia should be considered at increased risk for neonatal intracranial bleeding [Noris et al 2014b].

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.