http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/myhre

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Myhre syndrome, the following are recommended (if not completed previously as part of the diagnostic evaluation).


Cardiovascular

Upper- and lower-extremity blood pressure measurements

Two-dimensional echocardiography with Doppler

For those with abnormal findings, more extensive imaging if indicated including cardiac catheterization to document the characteristic hemodynamics of restrictive cardiomyopathy


Respiratory

Assessment for airway stenosis by the least invasive means possible with assessment for signs of upper-airway obstruction including noisy breathing, work of breathing, and oxygen saturation

Assessment of pulmonary function and oxygen saturation for evidence of obstructive or restrictive lung disease

Gastrointestinal. Based on clinical indication (by least invasive means possible), evaluate for evidence of stenosis.

Neuropsychiatric. Neuropsychometric evaluation may be indicated for individuals with autistic behaviors and/or cognitive involvement.


Other

Ophthalmology evaluation

Speech evaluation

Audiology evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment is largely symptomatic and may include the following.


Cardiovascular

Management by a cardiologist trained in congenital heart disease, including pericardial disease and restrictive cardiomyopathy. At present, no evidence suggests that in Myhre syndrome management of specific lesions would differ from standard care in current clinical practice, except that any unnecessary instrumentation should be avoided as associated tissue trauma may induce stenosis and the scarring-type tissue response unique to Myhre syndrome.

Affected individuals who are in heart failure should be under the care of a cardiovascular specialist with access to a transplant center.

Maximize all medical treatment and minimize instrumentation for all cardiac studies and therapies.

Medical treatment of systemic hypertension and pulmonary hypertension (based on underlying cause).


Respiratory

Affected individuals have required long-term tracheostomy due to complete and recurrent tracheal stenosis following multiple and/or traumatic intubations [McGowan et al 2011, Oldenburg et al 2015, Starr et al 2015]. To avoid traumatic intubation, consider using a size-smaller uncuffed endotracheal tube. Elective tracheal surgery/intubation should be avoided; tracheal resection is contraindicated [Oldenburg et al 2015].

Symptomatic treatment of restrictive lung disease

Oxygen supplementation as necessary


Gastrointestinal

Minimal instrumentation of the gastrointestinal tract is advised because post-operative adhesions can be fatal [Lindor et al 2012].

Endoscopy should be approached with caution to avoid airway manipulation which increases the risk for tracheal/laryngeal scarring/stenosis [Oldenburg et al 2015]. Noninvasive 3D imaging may be preferred.

Aggressive management of constipation (through dietary means or medication if necessary) is indicated.

Neuropsychiatric. The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay/intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.


Global developmental disability/intellectual disability educational issues

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states.

Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed.

Ages 5-21 years. In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs may be considered. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States, Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) enrollment is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

In the United States, families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.


Social/behavioral issues

Children may qualify for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of autism spectrum disorder, including applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA therapy is individualized therapy targeted to each child’s behavioral, social, and adaptive strengths and weaknesses and is typically performed one on one with a board-certified behavior analyst.

Consultation with a developmental pediatrician may be helpful in guiding parents through appropriate behavioral management strategies or providing prescription medications when necessary.

Individualized behavioral therapy or pharmacologic treatment for anxiety, depression, or other psychological manifestations as per current clinical practice is appropriate.


Hearing

Hearing loss. Appropriate hearing augmentation (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview)

Persistent middle ear effusions. Myringotomy tubes as needed


Craniofacial

Individuals with orofacial clefting or velopharyngeal insufficiency should be referred to a craniofacial clinic with pediatric experience. These individuals benefit most from a multidisciplinary approach to care.

A craniofacial clinic associated with a major pediatric medical center usually includes a surgical team (craniofacial surgeon and neurosurgeon), clinical geneticist, ophthalmologist, otolaryngologist, pediatrician, radiologist, psychologist, multiple dental specialists, audiologist, speech therapist, and social worker.


Skeletal

Consider physical therapy to keep joints mobile (no study has been done on efficacy). Note: It is not known if passive range of motion exercises help maintain flexibility.

A systematic study of growth hormone treatment for short stature has not been done. One affected individual has been noted to have anecdotal improvement in growth velocity; however, it is unknown if adult height would be affected [Starr et al 2015].

Ophthalmology. Routine treatment of strabismus and refractive errors. Note: Complications from surgical repair have not been reported.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Limiting tissue trauma appears to be the single most important preventive measure: The literature suggests increased risk of proliferative fibrosis following otherwise uncomplicated endotracheal intubation and surgical procedures. When possible, alternative noninvasive approaches should be pursued during diagnosis and management [Oldenburg et al 2015, Starr et al 2015].

Extreme care with intubation and use of an endotracheal tube without a cuff (or careful monitoring of pressures with a cuff) may help prevent airway stenosis [Oldenburg et al 2015].

Minimize abdominal and pelvic procedures as extensive adhesions may develop postoperatively [Lindor et al 2012].

Hysterectomy should be an option of last resort for treatment of menorrhagia as post-surgical fibrosis is highly likely.

Surveillance




Cardiovascular

After normal baseline evaluations of upper- and lower-extremity blood pressure measurements, two-dimensional echocardiography with Doppler, and cardiology evaluation

In asymptomatic individuals with a normal echocardiogram at the time of initial diagnosis, repeat echocardiogram every 1-3 years. Note that pericardial effusion and restrictive cardiomyopathy may occur at any age and may be clinically asymptomatic [Starr et al 2015, Garavelli et al 2016, Lin et al 2016].

In individuals with abnormal findings at the time of initial diagnosis, more extensive imaging may be indicated given the progressive nature of the disorder (e.g., MRI to evaluate for pericardial thickening or effusion).


Respiratory

Consider oxygen saturation in children, with monitoring as needed for symptoms suggestive of restrictive/obstructive pulmonary disease and annual pulmonary function studies in children older than age six years if able to cooperate with test maneuvers.

Evaluation for upper airway stenosis (e.g., laryngotracheal stenosis) should be considered based on symptoms.


Other

Annual ophthalmologic and audiology evaluations

Monitoring of physical skill development and joint mobility

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Patients should be aggressively counseled not to smoke.

Limiting tissue trauma appears to be the single most important preventive concept in this disorder to communicate to all health care providers involved in their care (see Prevention of Secondary Findings).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.