http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/myotonic-d

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in adults with classic DM1, the following evaluations are recommended: Baseline neurologic examination Baseline examination by an ophthalmologist familiar with the iridescent posterior subcapsular cataract characteristic of DM1 Assessment of thyroid function ECG, Holter monitoring, and echocardiogram to evaluate syncope, palpitations, and other symptoms of potential cardiac origin Pulmonary function test Assessment of strength [Whittaker et al 2006] Assessment of cognitive ability Fasting blood glucose determination Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor To establish the extent of disease and needs in children diagnosed with congenital myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), the following evaluations are recommended: Baseline neurologic examination Baseline ophthalmologic examination Assessment of motor skills Assessment of cognitive ability Baseline cardiac evaluation Pulmonary function test Baseline endocrine evaluation Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management guidelines have been developed [Gagnon et al 2010]. No specific treatment exists for the progressive weakness in individuals with DM1. A physiatrist, occupational therapist, or physical therapist can help evaluate affected individuals regarding the need for ankle-foot orthoses, wheelchairs, or other assistive devices as the disease progresses. Orthopedic surgery may benefit children with musculoskeletal deformities [Canavese & Sussman 2009]. Special education evaluation is indicated for children with DM1. Increased weakness in DM1 has been associated with both hypothyroidism and certain cholesterol-lowering medications (i.e. statins); thus, some strength may return if these causative factors are eliminated. Myotonia in DM1 is typically mild to moderate and rarely requires treatment [Ricker et al 1999]. Anecdotally, some individuals have responded to mexilitene or carbamazepine. Logigian et al [2010] found mexilitene 150-200 mg TID effective and safe for treating myotonia. Pain management can be an important part of DM1 treatment. Different medications and combinations of medications work for some individuals, although none has been routinely effective; medications that have been used include mexilitene, gabapentin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), low-dose thyroid replacement, low-dose steroids, and tricyclic antidepressants. When used as part of a comprehensive pain management program, low-dose analgesics may provide relief. Consultation with a cardiologist is appropriate for individuals with cardiac symptoms or ECG evidence of arrhythmia because fatal arrhythmias can occur prior to other symptoms in individuals with DM1. More advanced, invasive electrophysiologic testing of the heart may be required [Sovari et al 2007]. Cataracts can be removed if they impair vision. Recurrence after surgery has been reported [Garrott et al 2004]. Males with low serum concentration of testosterone require hormone replacement therapy if they are symptomatic. In most cases, surgical excision of pilomatrixoma including clear margins and its overlying skin is the preferred treatment [Cigliano et al 2005]. An extensive review found no evidence for successful treatment of hypersomnia with routine psychostimulants [Annane et al 2006], although others have reported benefit [Talbot et al 2003, Wintzen et al 2007].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Veyckemans & Scholtes [2013] have reviewed the anesthetic management of individuals with DM1. Choice of induction agents, airway care, local anesthesia, and neuromuscular blockade were found to minimize complications during surgery in individuals with DM1. Avoid using succinylcholine. Propofol-induced pain can induce myotonia. Sevoflurane has been used uneventfully. Cardiac pacemakers or implantable cardioverter-defibrillators may prevent life-threatening arrhythmias [Wahbi et al 2012, Facenda-Lorenzo et al 2013]. Gagnon et al [2013] presented evidence that obesity, tobacco smoking, physical inactivity and alcohol/illicit drug consumption are lifestyle risk factors associated with more severe DM1 phenotypes.

Surveillance

 Gagnon et al [2010] provide guidelines for surveillance. The following are appropriate: Annual ECG to detect asymptomatic cardiac conduction defects. Some centers perform annual 24-hour Holter monitoring of individuals with DM1 who do not have cardiac symptoms [Sá et al 2007, Sovari et al 2007, Cudia et al 2009]. Tissue Doppler monitoring has also been proposed [Parisi et al 2007, Wahbi et al 2012]. Annual measurement of fasting serum glucose concentration and glycosylated hemoglobin concentration, with treatment for diabetes mellitus if indicated [Matsumura et al 2009] Ophthalmologic examination every two years to evaluate for cataract formation Attention to nutritional status including mastication and trouble eating [Motlagh et al 2005, Engvall et al 2009, Umemoto et al 2009] Polysomnographic follow-up of sleep complaints [Kumar et al 2007]

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Statins used to lower cholesterol may sometimes cause muscle pain and weakness. Mathieu et al [1997] noted that “[n]umerous cases of perioperative complications in patients with DM have been reported. Hazards have been associated with the use of thiopentone, suxamethonium, neostigmine, and halothane. A retrospective study of perioperative complications was conducted for 219 patients who had their first surgery under general anesthesia at the Chicoutimi Hospital. The overall frequency of complications was 8.2% (18 of 219). Most complications (16 of 18) were pulmonary, including five patients with acute ventilatory failure necessitating ventilatory support, four patients with atelectasis, and three patients with pneumonia. Using multivariate analysis, [the authors] found that the risk of perioperative pulmonary complications (PPC) was significantly higher after an upper abdominal surgery and for patients with a severe muscular disability, as assessed by the presence of proximal limb weakness. The likelihood of PPC was not related to any specific anesthetic drug. Because of the increased risk of PPC, careful monitoring during the early postoperative period, protection of the upper airways, chest physiotherapy, and incentive spirometry are mandatory in all symptomatic patients with DM, particularly those with a severe muscular disability or those who have undergone an upper abdominal surgery.” Veyckemans & Scholtes [2013] have reviewed appropriate anesthetic care for patients with DM1 and DM2. Malignant hyperthermia during anesthesia including the use of vecuronium [Nishi et al 2004] has been reported in DM1 but is very uncommon [Kirzinger et al 2010]. (See Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility.) Aggressive doxorunbicin-based chemotherapy for lymphoma in a person with DM1 produced sudden atrial fibrillations [Montella et al 2005].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic at-risk adult relatives of an affected individual to allow for early diagnosis and treatment of cardiac manifestations, diabetes mellitus, and cataracts. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Women with DM1 are at risk for complications during pregnancy including increased spontaneous abortion rate, premature labor, prolonged labor, retained placenta, placenta previa, and postpartum hemorrhage [Zaki et al 2007, Argov & de Visser 2009]. Special surveillance during pregnancy of women with DM1 includes ultrasound examination; evaluation for placenta previa; and anticipation of possible polyhydramnios, prolonged labor, and/or need for delivery by cesarean section [Argov & de Visser 2009]. Complications related to the presence of congenital DM1 in the fetus include reduced fetal movement and polyhydramnios. Awater et al [2012] found increased rates of caesarean birth and preterm delivery among women with DM1.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Moderate-intensity strength training does no harm, but it is unclear whether it offers measurable benefits [van der Kooi et al 2005]. A controlled study of an exercise program for DM1 showed neither beneficial nor detrimental effects [Kierkegaard et al 2011].