

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with nail-patella syndrome (NPS), the following evaluations are recommended: Blood pressure measurement and urinalysis to screen for renal disease, plus a urine albumin:creatinine ratio on a first-morning urine. The latter is a more sensitive measure of renal disease than urinalysis as it corrects for urine concentration. If any abnormalities are detected, the individual should then be referred to a nephrologist. Screening for glaucoma as soon as a child is able to cooperate with the examination. The examination should include measurement of intraocular pressure, examination of the optic disc, and assessment of visual fields in order to detect normal pressure glaucoma. If any abnormalities are detected, individuals should be referred to an ophthalmologist. Any infant or young child found to have an abnormal or absent red reflex on eye examination by a primary care physician should be referred to an ophthalmologist immediately. History and physical examination to detect orthopedic problems History to identify gastrointestinal, neurologic, or vasomotor abnormalities Before surgery or intensive physiotherapy for orthopedic complaints, investigation via MRI for possible bone/soft tissue anatomic abnormalities History and examination to detect dental anomalies Consideration of formal quantification of bone mineral density (BMD) via dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) as indicator of fracture propensity based on reported low BMD and increased fracture risk in NPS DEXA norms are readily available in most clinical settings for adults and may be pursued in all young adults (age >18 years) at least once. Pediatric DEXA norms are often less readily available, but may be obtained via local pediatric endocrinologist or machine manufacturer. No formal recommendations for DEXA scanning of pediatric patients exist at this time, but DEXA should be pursued if fractures or unexplained skeletal pain occurs with additional clinical evaluation. Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Hypertension and renal disease are treated as in the general population. When renal transplantation is necessary, results are usually favorable. ACE inhibitors are useful in slowing progression of proteinuria, but their use should be monitored carefully in children. Orthopedic problems may be helped by analgesics, physiotherapy, splinting, bracing, or surgery. Because of the abnormal joint anatomy that may be present in individuals with NPS, MRI of joints to identify abnormal anatomy is important prior to surgery, so that appropriate surgical treatment can be planned in advance. Treatment as in the general population for: Glaucoma Constipation Dental problems

Surveillance

 Annual measurement of the following is appropriate: Measurement of blood pressure Urinalysis Urine albumin:creatinine ratio on a first-morning urine. If any abnormalities are detected, the individual should be referred to a nephrologist. Screening for glaucoma from the time that a child is compliant with the examination Dental examination is indicated at least every six months. DEXA scanning frequency in adults is based on clinical symptoms, abnormalities detected on previous evaluations, and standard practice in peri- and post-menopausal females and older males.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Chronic use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be avoided because of their detrimental effect on kidney function.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Early diagnosis of NPS in at-risk family members allows for ophthalmologic and renal screening, especially in individuals with mild-moderate skeletal involvement who may not otherwise come to clinical attention. Molecular genetic testing can be used if the pathogenic variant in the family is known; otherwise, monitor renal findings (i.e., blood pressure, urinalysis, and urine albumin:creatinine ratio on a first-morning urine) and screen for glaucoma. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

 Renal problems may present during (or be exacerbated by) pregnancy and in one study 29% of pregnant women with NPS developed preeclampsia [Sweeney et al 2003]. Hence, frequent urinalysis and blood pressure measurement is recommended in pregnant women with NPS. Medication used to treat renal disease, such as ACE inhibitors, should be reviewed ideally prior to pregnancy, or at least as soon as pregnancy is recognized, so that transition to an alternative treatment can be considered in order to avoid potential adverse effects of ACE inhibitors on the developing fetus.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.