

Management



Evaluation Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with mtDNA-associated Leigh syndrome or NARP, the following evaluations are recommended: Developmental assessment Neurologic evaluation, MRI, MRS, EEG (if seizures are suspected), and nerve conduction studies (if neuropathy is suspected) Metabolic evaluation, including plasma and cerebrospinal fluid lactate and pyruvate concentrations, urine organic acids Ophthalmologic evaluation Cardiac evaluation Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 As for most mitochondrial diseases, no specific curative treatment for mtDNA-associated Leigh syndrome and NARP exists [Kanabus et al 2014]. Supportive management includes treatment of the following: Acidosis. Sodium bicarbonate or sodium citrate for acute exacerbations of acidosis Seizures. Appropriate antiepileptic drugs tailored to the type of seizure under the supervision of a neurologist. Sodium valproate and barbiturates should be avoided because of their inhibitory effects on the mitochondrial respiratory chain [Anderson et al 2002]. 
                Dystonia Benzhexol, baclofen, tetrabenazine, and gabapentin may be useful, alone or in various combinations; an initial low dose should be started and gradually increased until symptom control is achieved or intolerable side effects occur. Botulinum toxin injection has also been used in individuals with Leigh syndrome and severe intractable dystonia. Cardiomyopathy. Anticongestive therapy may be required and should be supervised by a cardiologist. Regular assessment of daily caloric intake and adequacy of dietary structure including micronutrients and feeding management is indicated. Psychological support for the affected individual and family is essential.

Surveillance

 Affected individuals should be followed at regular intervals (typically every 6-12 months) to monitor progression and the appearance of new symptoms. Neurologic, ophthalmologic, and cardiologic evaluations are recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Sodium valproate and barbiturates should be avoided because of their inhibitory effect on the mitochondrial respiratory chain [Anderson et al 2002]. Anesthesia can potentially aggravate respiratory symptoms and precipitate respiratory failure, so careful consideration should be given to its use and to monitoring of the individual prior to, during, and after anesthetic procedures [Parikh et al 2015]. Dichloroacetate (DCA) reduces blood lactate by activating the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. Anecdotal reports have suggested that DCA may cause some short-term clinical improvement in mtDNA-associated Leigh syndrome [Fujii et al 2002]. A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of DCA in a different mitochondrial disease, MELAS, found no benefit and in fact documented a toxic effect of DCA on peripheral nerves [Kaufmann et al 2006]. A subsequent report described the results of long-term administration of DCA to 36 children with congenital lactic acidosis (randomized control trial followed by an open label extension) [Stacpoole et al 2008]. This study concluded that oral DCA is well tolerated in young children with congenital lactic acidosis and that it was not possible to determine whether the peripheral neuropathy associated with long-term DCA administration is attributable to the drug or to the underlying disease process. It therefore appears prudent for individuals with mtDNA-associated Leigh syndrome or NARP to avoid DCA, in view of the underlying risk of peripheral neuropathy caused by the disease itself in these conditions.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Antioxidants, including coenzyme Q10 and analogs such as idebenone, can enhance the function and viability of cultured cells from individuals with the m.8993T>G pathogenic variant [Geromel et al 2001, Mattiazzi et al 2004] but have no proven efficacy in the treatment of Leigh syndrome. Newer mitochondrial-targeted antioxidants (e.g., mitoQ) that show much greater protection against oxidative stress in cultured cell and animal models [Jauslin et al 2003, Adlam et al 2005] have been proposed as potential therapies for a range of oxidative stress-related disorders. However, no clinical trials relevant to Leigh syndrome have been reported. EPI-743 is a structurally modified variant of CoQ10 (bis-methyl instead of bis-methoxy groups on the quinone ring, and chain length of 3 instead of 10 prenyl units) and was identified in a drug screen to have 1000-fold increased antioxidant properties compared to native CoQ10 [Enns et al 2012]. Open-label trials in end-of-life settings appeared to slow disease progression compared to historical natural history data [Enns et al 2012, Martinelli et al 2012], but the extremely unpredictable natural history of Leigh syndrome causes difficulty in interpretation of open-label studies. A Phase 2B randomized placebo-controlled double-blind crossover clinical trial of EPI-743 in children with Leigh syndrome completed in May 2015; findings have not yet been reported (ClinicalTrials.gov). Gene therapy provides a potential approach to decreasing the proportion of abnormal mtDNA in the cells of an individual. However, all of the approaches discussed below are still a long way from clinical applicability. In allotopic gene expression, mtDNA genes are recoded so that they can be inserted into and expressed from the nucleus. This technique was used successfully to transfer recoded mitochondrial MT-ATP6 and thereby rescue the ATP synthesis defect in cybrids containing the m.8993T>G pathogenic variant associated with maternally inherited Leigh syndrome and NARP [Manfredi et al 2002]. Studies in cultured cells have shown that a mitochondrially targeted restriction endonuclease can recognize and degrade mtDNA containing the m.8993T>G pathogenic variant found in NARP and mtDNA-associated Leigh syndrome, while leaving wild-type mtDNA intact [Tanaka et al 2002]. Another study used an adenoviral vector to deliver the restriction endonuclease to the mitochondrion and showed that there was no evidence of nuclear DNA damage in treated cells [Alexeyev et al 2008]. Transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) engineered to localize to mitochondria (“mito-TALENs”) were used to eliminate mutated mtDNA from cybrids containing the m.14459G>A pathogenic variant, a maternally inherited variant that can cause Leigh syndrome [Bacman et al 2013]. More recently mito-TALENs were demonstrated to be efficacious in eliminating NARP-associated m.9176T>C mutated mtDNA from artificial mammalian oocytes [Reddy et al 2015]. Selective elimination of mutated mtDNA using mitochondrially targeted zinc-finger nucleases (mtZFNs) has also been achieved for the m.8993T>G NARP-causing variant [Gammage et al 2016]. Promising results have been obtained using a similar proof-of-principle approach in a mouse model of mtDNA heteroplasmy to shift the mtDNA heteroplasmy in muscle and brain transduced with recombinant viruses [Bayona-Bafaluy et al 2005]. This strategy could potentially prevent disease onset or reverse clinical symptoms in individuals harboring certain heteroplasmic pathogenic variants in mtDNA. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 A range of vitamins and other compounds are often used in the hope of improving mitochondrial function. Most commonly these include riboflavin, thiamine, and coenzyme Q10 (each at 50-100 mg/3x/day) [Kanabus et al 2014]. The ketogenic diet (KD) has been proposed as a therapy for mitochondrial disease, in particular complex I deficiency. Although this high-fat, low-carbohydrate diet has proven efficacy for refractory epilepsies, evidence for its use in the treatment of primary mitochondrial disorders is currently lacking. Preliminary reports of reducing mtDNA deletion load in cybrid models using ketones [Santra et al 2004] were not replicated in a mouse model of mitochondrial disease, although there did appear to be some improvement of myopathy in these mice [Ahola-Erkkilä et al 2010]. More recently KD was reported to attenuate liver disease in a mouse model of complex III deficiency [Purhonen et al 2017]. However, a modified Atkins diet (also high fat, low carbohydrate) led to muscle pain and elevation of creatine kinase in a small series of individuals with mitochondrial myopathy, suggesting that KD may not be well tolerated in individuals with mitochondrial disease [Ahola et al 2016]. Further clinical trials are required to determine the efficacy of KD in mitochondrial disorders. Another promising option is supplementation with the fatty acid decanoic acid, which is thought to be the active component of the KD and appears to stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis in cell models [Hughes et al 2014], including fibroblasts from individuals with complex I-deficient Leigh syndrome [Kanabus et al 2016]; clinical trials have yet to be performed. Biotin, creatine, succinate, and idebenone have also been used. Some of these agents may show partial efficacy in some individuals with milder mitochondrial disorders, but sustained therapeutic response in individuals with NARP or Leigh syndrome has not been described. Several studies have investigated whether upregulation of mitochondrial biogenesis may provide an effective therapeutic approach for mitochondrial respiratory chain diseases. This approach involves using agonists such as bezafibrate or resveratrol to stimulate the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) coactivator alpha (PGC-1alpha) pathway. Alternatively, nicotinamide analogs such as nicotinamide riboside or nicotinamide mononucleotide have been used to boost nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) levels and induce mitochondrial biogenesis via the same PGC1-alpha pathway. A study by Bastin et al [2008] showed promising results in fibroblasts from individuals with a range of respiratory chain enzyme defects; nine of 14 patient cell lines tested exhibited a significant increase in the activity of the deficient respiratory chain enzyme after bezafibrate treatment. These findings are likely to prompt clinical trials; however, no data showing that such approaches will be effective in individuals with mitochondrial disorders have been reported to date. Oral administration of nicotinamide riboside to two mouse models with predominantly myopathic phenotypes showed improvements in NAD levels in mouse tissues and induced mitochondrial biogenesis, delaying disease progression [Cerutti et al 2014, Khan et al 2014]. Nicotinamide riboside also showed promising results in fibroblasts from an individual with pathogenic variants in NDUFS1, a Leigh syndrome-associated nuclear gene [Felici et al 2015], with increased NAD levels and restoration of mitochondrial membrane potential. It remains unclear whether nicotinamide riboside can effectively boost NAD levels in brain, and nicotinamide mononucleotide may show more promise for neurologic disorders such as Leigh syndrome, since it has been shown to boost mitochondrial respiratory function in a mouse model of Alzheimer disease [Long et al 2015]. Clinical trials of nicotinamide analogs in individuals with Leigh syndrome have yet to be reported. Another study explored the use of alpha-ketoglutarate and aspartate in transmitochondrial cybrids heteroplasmic for the m.8993T>G pathogenic variant [Sgarbi et al 2009]. The rationale was that these substrates would increase flux through the citric acid cycle, thereby increasing ATP production independently of oxidative phosphorylation (so-called ‘substrate level phosphorylation’). Initial results were promising, but further studies are needed before clinical applications can be considered. Finally, two promising approaches have been suggested by recent studies in the Ndufs4-/- mouse model of Leigh syndrome. Rapamycin markedly delayed the onset and progression of symptoms in Ndufs4-/- mice [Johnson et al 2013]. The mechanism of action was unclear, as it did not appear to be acting via known mechanisms such as immune suppression, stimulating macroautophagy or induction of the mitochondrial unfolded protein response. However, the Ndufs4-/- mouse brains showed activation of the rapamycin target mTOR, which is a central coordinator of nutrient sensing and growth. Rapamycin suppressed mTOR activation, indicating that restoration of cellular signaling pathways may be a key to the beneficial effect. Rapamycin has a number of side effects (e.g., immunosuppression, hyperlipidemia, decreased wound healing) that may limit its clinical utility; however, this report identifies a potential new pathway to target for treatment of Leigh syndrome and other mitochondrial disorders. Chronic exposure of Ndufs4-/- mice to hypoxia (11% O2 instead of 21% O2, equivalent to an elevation of ~4500 m) extended life span and alleviated physiologic abnormalities such as defects in locomotor activity, body temperature instability, and poor weight gain [Jain et al 2016]. While humans can acclimatize to comparable oxygen tensions, the authors emphasized that caution was needed in subjecting affected individuals to altered O2 levels. Further studies are needed to elucidate whether partial or intermittent hypoxia or pharmacologic agents influencing the hypoxic response may be suitable therapeutic approaches.