

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of the disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA), the following should be considered: Neurologic examination for dystonia, spasticity, parkinsonism, and other neurologic findings, including evaluation of ambulation and speech. Consider consultation with a movement disorders specialist Physical therapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy assessments Thorough ophthalmologic examination (if not performed during the diagnostic evaluation) Dietary assessment Clinical genetics consultation Note: The extent of disease in an affected individual is often well characterized during the diagnostic work up, which frequently includes neurophysiologic studies (EEG, EMG, electroretinogram, and/or visual evoked potentials) and brain MRI.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatments for NBIA are palliative. The following treatments should be considered (some do not apply to all subtypes of NBIA): Pharmacologic treatment of spasticity and seizures Trial of oral or intrathecal baclofen for those with significant dystonia Botulinum toxin for those with focal dystonia L-DOPA treatment, which is beneficial in rare cases. Note: Some will have an initially dramatic response that usually diminishes over time; some will develop prominent dyskinesias early in the treatment Deep brain stimulation, used clinically for dystonia with increasing frequency; shows some evidence of benefit (see Therapies Under Investigation). Psychiatric treatment for those with a later-onset, more protracted course accompanied by neuropsychiatric symptoms As NBIA progresses, many affected individuals may experience episodes of extreme dystonia lasting for day or weeks. It is especially important during these episodes to evaluate for treatable causes of pain, which may include occult GI bleeding, urinary tract infections, and occult bone fractures. The combination of osteopenia in a non-ambulatory person with marked stress on the long bones from dystonia places many individuals with NBIA at high risk for fractures without apparent trauma.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Swallowing evaluation and regular dietary assessments are indicated to assure adequate nutrition Once the individual can no longer maintain an adequate diet orally, gastrostomy tube placement is indicated Gastric feeding tube and/or tracheostomy is appropriate as needed to prevent aspiration pneumonia. Over-the-counter fiber supplements and/or stool softeners are indicated to treat constipation, which is likely caused by a combination of immobility, diet, and medications.

Surveillance

 The following should be performed on a regular basis: Monitoring of height and weight using appropriate growth curves to screen children for worsening nutritional status Ophthalmologic assessment Assessment of ambulation and speech abilities

Therapies Under Investigation

 Deep brain stimulation (DBS). As DBS has become a common treatment for primary dystonia, it is also being used more frequently to attempt to treat the secondary dystonia seen in NBIA, most often in individuals with PKAN. Because a limited number of persons with PKAN have undergone such treatment and care has been provided at a variety of centers, it is not possible to evaluate the efficacy of DBS for this population. The largest cohort studied at the same center included six individuals with PKAN. Those treated with DBS showed overall improvements in writing, speech, walking, and global measures of motor skills [Castelnau et al 2005]. However, at publication the length of follow-up time varied from only six to 42 months. Another study of four individuals with PKAN suggested that DBS had decreasing benefit when measured at both six and 12 months following the procedure [Lim et al 2012]. Additional case reports with varying follow-up times and anecdotal reports from families with PKAN also support that DBS can provide benefit in some cases [Krause et al 2006, Shields et al 2007, Isaac et al 2008, Mikati et al 2009]. Even with these limitations, these studies suggested that DBS may hold more promise than previously recognized. Larger prospective studies may improve understanding of the factors that influence the outcomes of DBS use in NBIA [Pauls & Timmermann 2012]. Baclofen is one of the mainstay drugs, used both orally and intrathecally, to treat dystonia in NBIA. In 2009 Albright and Ferson reported favorable outcomes from a new technique used to deliver intraventricular baclofen in nine children and one adult with secondary dystonia, including one child with PKAN [Albright & Ferson 2009]. Additional studies are necessary to determine the optimal dose and efficacy in PKAN and other NBIAs. Intraventricular delivery of baclofen is of interest because delivery at this site may better treat upper-body and facial dystonia (e.g., blepharospasm) and may result in higher baclofen concentrations over the cortex. Iron chelation. Interest in iron chelation has reemerged as data on deferiprone (Ferriprox®) have accumulated in several patient populations. Iron chelating agents have been tried in the past without clear benefit [Dooling et al 1974]. Until recently, trials were limited by the development of systemic iron deficiency before any clinical neurologic benefits were evident. Unlike earlier drugs, deferiprone crosses the blood-brain barrier and removes intracellular iron. Case reports suggest regression of symptoms in two adults with NBIA of unknown cause (i.e., non-PKAN NBIA) [Forni et al 2008, Kwiatkowski et al 2012]. A Phase II pilot trial in Italy with ten persons with PKAN found that deferiprone treatment was able to reduce brain iron levels; over the six-month treatment period there were no serious adverse events but also no significant changes in clinical status, suggesting that a longer treatment period is necessary to determine the utility of this drug [Zorzi et al 2011]. A clinical trial that has received FDA approval in the US is currently enrolling. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.