http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/nem

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with nemaline myopathy (NM), the following evaluations are recommended: Thorough assessment of respiratory status, including pulmonary function studies and assessment for nocturnal hypoxia For early-onset forms, assessment of feeding abilities (sucking, swallowing, gastroesophageal reflux) and growth parameters to determine the need for feeding interventions such as gavage feeding or gastrostomy insertion Physical examination to evaluate for joint contractures Physical examination to evaluate for scoliosis, followed by spinal x-ray if scoliosis is suspected Physical and occupational therapy evaluations relevant to the degree of weakness Speech therapy evaluation if dysarthria and/or hypernasal speech is present Orthodontic evaluation if palatal anomalies are present Evaluation for the presence of dilated cardiomyopathy (rare association) Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Consensus for management of congenital myopathies have been published [Wang et al 2012] (full text). A multidisciplinary approach to the clinical management of the affected individual greatly improves quality of life and can influence survival: Aggressive treatment of lower respiratory tract infections Evaluation at an early stage of the need for intermittent or permanent use of a mechanical ventilator to prevent insidious nocturnal hypoxia Assurance of adequate caloric intake and appropriate nutritional status, including special feeding techniques and high-calorie formulas and foods, if indicated Standard treatment of gastroesophageal reflux, if present Referral to an orthopedist for management of scoliosis and joint contractures, as in the general population Physical therapy for maintenance/improvement of function and joint mobility Speech therapy if dysarthria and/or hypernasal speech is present Assessment of cardiac status because of the risk (albeit low) of cardiomyopathy or cor pulmonale

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Preoperative assessment of pulmonary function is essential to ensure optimal timing of surgical procedures and to minimize anesthetic risk. Anesthetics are generally well tolerated in individuals with NM. Ryan et al [2001] reviewed the outcome of 130 affected individuals who underwent one or more surgical procedures. None developed malignant hyperthermia. However, five developed unexpected postoperative respiratory failure (following scoliosis repair in 4 individuals and fundoplication in 1), necessitating prolonged ventilation in three individuals and resulting in the death of another.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Regular formal assessment of respiratory function, including monitoring of sleep studies when significant respiratory impairment is identified Routine assessment for scoliosis and joint contractures Routine assessment of physical function and the need for mechanical assistance, such as a wheelchair

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Malignant hyperthermia is a risk in congenital myopathies such as central core disease and in some muscular dystrophies. NM has not been definitively associated with malignant hyperthermia to date, although bradycardia and slight hyperthermia have been reported during cardiac surgery. It is advisable to avoid neuromuscular blocking agents when possible, especially given the reports of core-rod myopathies linking to genes for ryanodine receptor pathogenic variants [Monnier et al 2000, Scacheri et al 2000]. Prolonged periods of immobilization should be avoided after illness or surgery, as immobility may markedly exacerbate muscle weakness [Ryan et al 2001].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from medical surveillance and preventive measures. If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. If the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known, a targeted clinical examination, with or without neurophysiologic testing, can clarify whether a muscle biopsy should be considered. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnancy and delivery are relatively well tolerated by women with NM [Ryan et al 2001]. A high frequency of obstetric complications is associated with an affected fetus, including polyhydramnios, decreased fetal movements, and abnormal presentation and/or fetal distress [Ryan et al 2001].

Therapies Under Investigation

 L-tyrosine has been proposed as a potential therapy. A precursor of the neurotransmitters dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine, L-tyrosine has been shown after oral administration in rats to increase catecholamine production and release, and to improve reaction and attention time and tolerance of physical stress. Two reports have shown subjectively improved muscle strength and clearance of oral secretions after oral tyrosine supplementation in individuals with NM. Subjective benefits from dietary supplementation with tyrosine have been reported in a small series of individuals with nemaline myopathy. L-tyrosine may be particularly effective in improving bulbar dysfunction and exercise tolerance in this condition [Ryan et al 2008]. L-tyrosine was shown to improve muscle strength in a mouse model of severe ACTA1 nemaline myopathy [Nguyen et al 2011]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 In a mouse model, endurance exercise programs may overcome the increase in muscle weakness that follows prolonged periods of immobilization [Nair-Shalliker et al 2004]. Human data are lacking; however, the authors have cared for some individuals with typical congenital-onset NM who have demonstrated clinical improvement after a program of regular low-impact exercise (cycling and swimming) [Authors, personal observation].