http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/nf1

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1), the following evaluations are recommended: Personal medical history with particular attention to features of NF1 Physical examination with particular attention to the skin, skeleton, cardiovascular system, and neurologic systems Ophthalmologic evaluation including slit lamp examination of the irides Developmental assessment in children Other studies as indicated on the basis of clinically apparent signs or symptoms Clinical genetics consultation In addition, a family history with particular attention to features of NF1 should be obtained, and physical examinations and ophthalmologic examinations (including slit lamp exams) should be performed on both parents to determine if the condition in the affected individual was inherited or occurred de novo. This determination is necessary for genetic counseling and may help identify patients who have a condition that is not caused by mutation of NF1, such as Legius syndrome or constitutive mismatch repair deficiency (see Differential Diagnosis). The value of performing routine head MRI scanning in individuals with NF1 at the time of diagnosis is controversial. Proponents state that such studies are useful in helping to establish the diagnosis in some individuals, in identifying any structural anomaly of the brain or skull, tumors, or vascular disease before it becomes clinically apparent in others, and in evaluating the context in which extracranial complications occur in still others. Those who oppose routine head MRI scanning point to the uncertain clinical significance of features such as UBOs, the cost of such imaging, and the requirement for sedation in small children. Although clinical management should not be affected by the presence of intracranial lesions such as UBOs or optic nerve thickening in asymptomatic individuals with NF1, finding such lesions may result in regularly repeating the MRI for reassurance despite the continued absence of related symptoms, adding further to the cost as well as to the anxiety of the individual and family, without any benefit.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Patient management guidelines for NF1 have been put forward by the American Academy of Pediatrics [Hersh 2008], the National Society of Genetic Counselors [Radtke et al 2007], and various expert groups [Ferner et al 2007, Williams et al 2009, Ferner & Gutmann 2013]. Individuals with NF1 who have abnormalities involving the eye, central or peripheral nervous system, spine or long bones, or cardiovascular system should be referred to an appropriate specialist for treatment. Discrete cutaneous or subcutaneous neurofibromas that are disfiguring or in inconvenient locations (e.g., at belt or collar lines) can be removed surgically, or, if small, by laser or electrocautery. Surgical treatment of plexiform neurofibromas is often unsatisfactory because of their intimate involvement with nerves and their tendency to grow back at the site of removal [Fadda et al 2007, Serletis et al 2007, Prada et al 2012, Nguyen et al 2013a]. In one small series in which surgical removal of superficial plexiform neurofibromas was undertaken in children while the tumors were still relatively small, it was possible to resect the neurofibromas without producing any neurologic deficit [Friedrich et al 2005]. Radiotherapy is contraindicated because of the risk of inducing malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors in these genetically predisposed individuals [Evans et al 2002]. A 54% reduction in the volume of a plexiform neurofibroma has been reported in an individual with NF1 who received two cycles of carboplatin chemotherapy for a coincident seminoma [Hummel et al 2011]. A phase II clinical trial reported apparent benefit in approximately 25% of patients with large plexiform neurofibromas treated with imatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor [Robertson et al 2012]. Further studies are in progress. Pain, development of a neurologic deficit, or enlargement of a preexisting plexiform neurofibroma may signal a malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and require immediate evaluation [Valeyrie-Allanore et al 2005]. Examination by MRI, PET, or PET/CT [Ferner et al 2008, Matsumine et al 2009, Warbey et al 2009, Salamon et al 2013] is useful in distinguishing benign and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, but definitive differentiation can only be made by histologic examination of the tumor. Complete surgical excision, when possible, is the only treatment that offers the possibility of cure of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors [Friedrich et al 2007, Dunn et al 2013]. Adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy is sometimes used as well and appears to have benefitted some (but not most) patients with NF1 [Gottfried et al 2006, Chaudhary & Borker 2012, Zehou et al 2013]. Most optic pathway gliomas found on MRI in people with NF1 are asymptomatic and do not require treatment [Segal et al 2010, Oh et al 2011, Cassiman et al 2013]. Chemotherapy is the treatment of choice for progressive optic pathway gliomas in children with NF1, although the results are mixed [Rosenfeld et al 2010, Ardern-Holmes & North 2011, Fisher et al 2012]. Surgical treatment of optic nerve glioma is usually reserved for cosmetic palliation in a blind eye, and radiotherapy is usually avoided because of the risk of inducing malignancy or moyamoya in the exposed field [Evans et al 2002, Ullrich et al 2007a]. The natural history of brain stem and cerebellar astrocytomas in individuals with NF1 should be taken into consideration in deciding on management of such tumors [Vinchon et al 2000, Rosser & Packer 2002, Ullrich et al 2007a]. Dystrophic scoliosis in children with NF1 often requires surgical management, which may be complex and difficult [Shen et al 2005, Tsirikos et al 2005, Stoker et al 2012, Kawabata et al 2013]. Nondystrophic scoliosis in persons with NF1 can be treated in a manner similar to idiopathic scoliosis. Surgical treatment of tibial pseudarthrosis is difficult and often unsatisfactory [Stevenson et al 2013].

Surveillance

 Patient management guidelines for NF1 have been put forward by the American Academy of Pediatrics [Hersh 2008], the National Society of Genetic Counselors [Radtke et al 2007], and various expert groups [Ferner et al 2007, Williams et al 2009, Ferner & Gutmann 2013]. The following are recommended: Annual physical examination by a physician who is familiar with the individual and with the disease Annual ophthalmologic examination in early childhood, less frequent examination in older children and adults Regular developmental assessment by screening questionnaire (in childhood) Regular blood pressure monitoring Other studies (e.g., MRI) only as indicated on the basis of clinically apparent signs or symptoms Monitoring of those who have abnormalities of the central nervous system, skeletal system, or cardiovascular system by an appropriate specialist

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 No limitations are necessary for most individuals with NF1. Limitations may be required if certain particular features such as tibial dysplasia or dysplastic scoliosis are present; in these instances the limitation is determined by the feature, not by the presence of NF1 itself. Radiotherapy of individuals with NF1 appears to be associated with a high risk of developing malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors within the field of treatment [Evans et al 2002, Sharif et al 2006].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Although most pregnancies in women with NF1 are normal, serious complications can occur [Chetty et al 2011, Terry et al 2013]. Many women with NF1 experience a rapid increase in the number and size of neurofibromas during pregnancy. Hypertension may first become symptomatic or, if preexisting, may be greatly exacerbated during pregnancy. Large pelvic or genital neurofibromas can complicate delivery, and cesarean section appears to be necessary more often in pregnant women with NF1 than in other women.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Various medical treatments for plexiform and spinal neurofibromas are being evaluated in clinical trials [Ferner & Gutmann 2013, Lin & Gutmann 2013]. Preliminary studies suggest that sirolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, may be useful in treating pain associated with plexiform neurofibromas [Hua et al 2014] (see Note). Radiofrequency therapy has shown promise for treatment of facial diffuse plexiform neurofibromas and café-au-lait spots in small clinical series [Baujat et al 2006, Yoshida et al 2007]. Controlled trials of several therapeutic approaches to malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors are available to individuals with NF1 [Ferner & Gutmann 2013, Lin & Gutmann 2013] (see Note). Several controlled trials for treatment of optic pathway gliomas are available to individuals with NF1 [Schnur 2012, Ferner & Gutmann 2013, Lin & Gutmann 2013] (see Note). Note:
NIH ClinicalTrials.gov has a list of current clinical trials for NF1.

Other

 Hormonal contraception appears not to stimulate the growth of neurofibromas in women with NF1 [Lammert et al 2006].