

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2), the following evaluations are recommended: Head MRI Hearing evaluation, including BAER Ophthalmologic evaluation Cutaneous examination Clinical genetics consultation Note: Evaluation and treatment of individuals with neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) are best undertaken in an NF2 center experienced in managing the multiple complications of the disease [Baser et al 2002, Evans et al 2005a]. For NF specialists see www.ctf.org. For NF2 service centers in UK see www.nfauk.org.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Vestibular schwannoma. Untreated tumors may be slow growing and not require active intervention in the short term [Masuda et al 2004, Slattery et al 2004]. Therapy remains primarily surgical. Small vestibular tumors (<1.5 mm) that are completely intercanalicular can often be completely resected, with preservation of both hearing and facial nerve function. Larger tumors are probably best managed expectantly, with debulking or decompression carried out only when brain stem compression, deterioration of hearing, and/or facial nerve dysfunction occur [Evans et al 2005a]. However, balancing between early surgery and preservation of facial function and later surgery when a patient is still hearing is difficult [Evans et al 2005a]. Stereotactic radiosurgery, most commonly with the gamma knife, has been offered as an alternative to surgery in select individuals with vestibular schwannoma. However, the outcomes from radiation treatment in individuals with NF2 are not as good as for individuals with sporadic unilateral vestibular schwannoma, with only approximately 60% long-term tumor control [Rowe et al 2003]. Malignant transformation is a possible, though probably not common, sequela [Baser et al 2000]; however, it should be noted that tumor development following radiation may take 15 years [Evans et al 2006]. This may involve development of a malignancy within the treated lesion or a new malignancy (e.g., glioblastoma) in the radiation field [Balasubramaniam et al 2007]. Management of individuals with vestibular tumors should include counseling for insidious problems with balance and underwater disorientation, which can result in drowning. Other tumors. Other intracranial, cranial nerve, or spinal nerve tumors are very slow growing, and surgical intervention for a tumor producing little impairment may cause disability years before it would occur naturally. Although ependymoma in individuals without NF2 is optimally treated with complete resection, and occasionally with radiotherapy and chemotherapy, it is unclear whether ependymoma in individuals with NF2 warrants aggressive management. Radiation therapy of NF2-associated tumors should be carefully considered because radiation exposure may induce, accelerate, or transform tumors in an individual (especially a child) with an inactive tumor suppressor gene [Baser et al 2000, Evans et al 2006]. Hearing. Hearing preservation and augmentation are important in the management of individuals with NF2. All affected individuals and their families should be referred to an audiologist to receive training in optimization of hearing and speech production. Lip-reading skills may be enhanced by instruction. Sign language may often be more effectively acquired before the individual loses hearing. Hearing aids may be helpful early in the course of the disease [Evans et al 2005a]. Auditory rehabilitation with a cochlear or brain stem implant should be discussed with those who have lost hearing [Evans et al 2005a]. Rarely, individuals who have had vascular insult to the cochlea, but otherwise are without nerve damage, may benefit from a cochlear implant. Ocular involvement. Early recognition and management of visual impairment from other manifestations of NF2 are extremely important.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Treatment concentrates on prevention of secondary complications. Prevention of substantial handicap from the disease can be achieved by appropriate expert treatment of tumors: A cervical spinal scan should be performed before cranial surgery to prevent complications from manipulation under anesthesia [Evans et al 2005a]. Spinal tumors may make epidural analgesia difficult; therefore, lumbosacral imaging should be performed before regional analgesia is given [Sakai et al 2005, Spiegel et al 2005].

Surveillance

 For at-risk individuals (1) in whom the known pathogenic variant in the family has been identified or (2) whose genetic status cannot be clarified by molecular genetic testing: MRI is usually begun between ages ten and 12 years but can be delayed in families in which the onset is known to be later [Evans et al 2005a]. MRI should be continued on an annual basis until at least the fourth decade of life. It is not clear if earlier surveillance (i.e., cranial MRI before age 10 years) is beneficial, and it is not known at what age monitoring can be safely stopped. Although some individuals with NF2 do not have symptoms until they are in their fifties, it is likely that "silent" tumors would be detected on an MRI performed at a younger age. Hearing evaluation, including BAER testing, may be useful in detecting changes in auditory nerve function before changes can be visualized by MRI. Routine complete eye examinations should be part of the care of all individuals with NF2.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Radiotherapy should be avoided in children with NF2 [Evans et al 2006].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Consideration of molecular genetic testing of at-risk family members (see Genetic Counseling) during childhood is appropriate for surveillance: Early identification of relatives who have inherited the family-specific NF2 pathogenic variant allows for appropriate screening using MRI for neuroimaging and brain stem auditory evoked response (BAER) testing for audiologic evaluation, thus resulting in earlier detection of disease manifestations and improved final outcomes [Evans et al 2005a]. Early identification of those who have not inherited the family-specific NF2 pathogenic variant eliminates the need for costly screening with MRI and BAER testing. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes. 
            Pregnancy Management
           Although no convincing evidence exists that schwannomas increase in size during pregnancy, hormonal effects on meningiomas are possible; therefore, assessment of the potential risk of increased intracranial pressure is important for women considering pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

 The search for an effective medical treatment for NF2-related tumors continues. One of the first groups of agents suggested were PAK1-blocking drugs [Hirokawa et al 2004]. Targeting the ERK1, AKT, integrin/focal adhesion kinase/Src/Ras signaling cascades, PDGFRbeta, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase C/Src/c-Raf pathway, VEG-F, and other pathways [Hanemann 2008, Evans et al 2009, Blair et al 2011], drugs such as avastin, elotinib [Plotkin et al 2008], lapatinib, and sorafenib [Ammoun et al 2008] may well be effective treatments for NF2. These agents could be tried on the Nf2 mouse model; the first human clinical trials in North America and the UK are also commencing. The most promising results have come from short- to medium-term treatment with avastin [Plotkin et al 2009], which seems to have efficacy against rapidly growing schwannomas and possibly ependymomas, although not meningiomas. Further development of treatment trials is underway [Evans et al 2009]. Recently drug trials have identified bevacizumab as a potential treatment [Plotkin et al 2009]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.