http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/nijmegen

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), the following evaluations are recommended (if they were not performed as part of the diagnostic evaluation): Assessment of growth Evaluation of immunologic status to include: Complete blood count; Absolute number of B-cells, T-cells, and T-cell subsets, with special attention to naïve CD4+CD45RA cells; Proliferative response of peripheral blood mononuclear cells to stimuli; Concentration of total serum immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA, IgM) and IgG subclasses; Evaluation for viruses with lymphotrotropic capacity (i.e., EBV and CMV). Evaluation for malignancy, including a focused family history of other individuals with cancer Evaluation of the endocrinologic status in females who are of pubertal age to include pelvic ultrasound to evaluate for streak gonads and plasma levels of FSH, LH, and estrogen [Chrzanowska et al 2010a] Assessment of cognitive development and intellectual abilities Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Nutrition. Because of chromosome instability, vitamin E and folic acid supplementation in doses appropriate for body weight is recommended. Infections. In individuals with severe humoral immunodeficiency and frequent infections, Ig replacement therapy should be considered. Ig replacement is typically administered either intravenously (IVIg) or subcutaneously (SCIg). The spectrum of recurrent infections in NBS is not opportunistic; therefore, the antibiotic selected should be appropriate for the microorganism being treated. Malignancy. Standard treatment chemotherapy protocols for lymphoid malignancies in NBS need to be adopted according to individual tolerance [Dembowska-Baginska et al 2009, Pastorczak et al 2016]. Treatment of affected individuals with solid tumors is also challenging. Radiotherapy of CNS tumors (medulloblastoma) caused severe complications and death in three individuals with NBS [Chrzanowska et al 1997, Bakhshi et al 2003, Distel et al 2003]. Although complete clinical remission (for >5 years) can be successfully achieved, in a proportion of affected individuals outcome is complicated by relapse or the development of a second malignancy [Dembowska-Baginska et al 2009, Bienemann et al 2011]. For individuals who achieve first remission, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) may be considered: The first successful bone marrow transplantation was performed in an individual with NBS who was initially misdiagnosed with Fanconi anemia (FA) [Gennery et al 2004, Gennery et al 2005]. Wolska-Kuśnierz et al [2015] summarized the results of HSCT in 14 individuals with NBS, nine of whom were alive [Gennery et al 2005, New et al 2005, Albert et al 2010]. Woźniak et al [2015] reported the successful use of non-myeloablative umbilical cord transplantation in a child age 19 months with NBS and severe combined immune deficiency. Further long-term follow up is needed to determine the outcome of HSCT in individuals with NBS. Puberty and fertility. Females with NBS who are of pubertal age should be referred for evaluation by a gynecologist and/or endocrinologist to evaluate for hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. Hormonal replacement therapy should be considered with careful monitoring of secondary sexual characteristics and uterus development. Females are infertile; similarly, no male paternity has been reported.

Surveillance

 
            Affected individuals Periodic follow-up to monitor developmental progress, physical growth (including weight, length/height, and head circumference) and frequency of infections; monitoring for weight loss, which may signal the presence of a malignancy Lifelong monitoring of immune biomarkers to include the parameters listed in Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis Careful follow up by oncologist: in individuals with NBS who are immunodeficient symptoms of lymphoid malignancies can be misleading. Monitoring for pubertal progression in both females and males and for premature ovarian insufficiency in females [Chrzanowska et al 2010b] Breast self-examination and ultrasonographic evaluation recommended in affected females 
            Carriers (heterozygotes) Parents. As obligate carriers, parents should be monitored for malignancy, in particular breast cancer in women and prostate cancer in men. No consensus tumor screening protocols for carriers have been published. At-risk sibs. Evidence of cancer risk in young carriers is insufficient to warrant screening in childhood.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Because the cells from individuals with NBS are as radiosensitive in vitro as those from individuals with ataxia-telangiectasia (another chromosome instability syndrome), conventional doses of radiation used in radiotherapy could be lethal in individuals with NBS. Family members should be made aware of this risk so that they can discuss appropriate treatment options if a malignancy is diagnosed. Similarly, unnecessary exposure to ionizing radiation should be avoided; instead of radiograph or CT scan, MR imaging and ultrasound examination are strongly recommended.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing for the NBN pathogenic variants identified in the proband to apparently asymptomatic sibs of a proband and young adult relatives at risk of being carriers (heterozygotes) in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from monitoring for malignancy (see Surveillance) and to inform treatment options if a malignancy is diagnosed (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.