http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/nkh

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with glycine encephalopathy, the following evaluations are recommended:

MRI of the brain in neonates. The presence of brain malformations is a prognostic indicator of severe outcome. Abnormalities in the posterior fossa should raise suspicion for the development of hydrocephalus. In a single case study, Mourmans et al [2006] showed that serial follow up of the diffusion-weighted images/apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) and the diffusion tensor images can provide evidence for the progressive loss of axonal structures seen in children with severe outcome.

EEG. The presence of a burst suppression pattern, rather than multifocal seizures, is a poor prognostic indicator.

Developmental assessment throughout the first years of life

Neurologic assessment in the first year to identify early development of spasticity in severely affected patients and of chorea in more mildly affected patients


Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



No effective treatment for severe glycine encephalopathy exists. Circumstantial evidence is however accumulating that in patients with pathogenic variants associated with residual enzyme activity (although not in patients with two severe pathogenic variants [Korman et al 2006]) early and aggressive treatment (benzoate and NMDA receptor blockade) results in improved neurodevelopmental outcome [Korman et al 2004; Flusser et al 2005; Van Hove et al, unpublished].

Current treatment of glycine encephalopathy consists of reduction of plasma concentration of glycine through treatment with sodium benzoate and blocking of glycinergic receptors, most commonly at the N-methyl D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor site.

Sodium benzoate. Oral administration of sodium benzoate at doses of 250-750 mg/kg/day can reduce the plasma glycine concentration into the normal range (see Table 1); however, this treatment does not normalize CSF glycine concentration. Lowering the plasma glycine concentration into the low normal range (between 120 and 300 µmol/L) is often required in order to observe beneficial effects. Benzoate is also a useful anticonvulsant agent in this disorder; it increases alertness. In more mildly affected individuals, it may also improve behavior.

In patients with the attenuated or mild phenotype, benzoate eliminates the intermittent episodes of severe lethargy often seen in this group. However, in patients with the severe phenotype, even high doses of benzoate administered early in the disease course do not affect the natural progression toward severe intellectual disability/seizure disorder.

The dose of sodium benzoate required varies and thus must be tailored to the individual patient. The dose should be gradually increased (usually by 50 mg/kg/day) until the plasma glycine concentration is within treatment range. The higher dose of this range (500-750 mg/kg/day) is frequently associated with gastritis, which may require oral administration of antacids, H2 antagonists, or proton pump inhibitors.

Patients with a mild form of the disease require a lower dose (200-450 mg/kg/day)

Patients with a severe form of the disease require a higher dose (550-750 mg/kg/day) [Van Hove et al 2005].

Dosing of benzoate in excess of the individual requirement is dangerous: benzoate toxicity has high morbidity and mortality [Van Hove et al 2005]. Hypocalcemia and low plasma glycine concentration (<150 µmol/L) are frequent early signs of benzoate overdose. Measurement of plasma benzoate concentration can be helpful in evaluating potential toxicity.

NMDA receptor site antagonists. Antagonists at the NMDA receptor site include dextromethorphan, ketamine, and felbamate. Use of each has resulted in improved seizure control.

In contrast, antagonism of a presumably overstimulated N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor channel complex with use of dextromethorphan, ketamine, or felbamate has been of limited benefit to the ultimate neurodevelopmental outcome of severely affected children; this may be different in mildly affected children.

Dextromethorphan doses commonly range from five to 15 mg/kg/day, but individual variability is substantial. Blood concentration can be monitored; the therapeutic level is not defined, but should be greater than 0 and lower than 100 nmol/L. Overdose of dextromethorphan causes increased sleepiness and while awake, more movement.

Note: Cimetidine slows the metabolism of dextromethorphan and should not be used in dextromethorphan slow metabolizers (a separate pharmacogenetic phenotype) as it may cause toxicity.

Seizure control is important for symptomatic benefit.

Control of severe seizure disorders such as burst suppression pattern or hypsarrhythmia tends to result in improved developmental progress.

Children with myoclonic seizures, such as newborns and infants, may benefit from benzodiazepines.

Standard antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as phenobarbital or phenytoin have limited efficacy for control of the seizures of glycine encephalopathy by themselves in neonates with this condition. However, because the nature of the epilepsy changes in late infancy, phenobarbital is often useful in seizures in older affected children.

Various antiepileptic drugs have been used with variable success. Felbamate has been successfully used in some children with difficult-to-treat seizures. This treatment must be closely monitored for signs of liver or hematopoietic toxicity.

Ketogenic diet has been used in some patients with variable success for the treatment of seizures. Ketogenic diet always lowers the amount of glycine substantially and the dose of benzoate should be reduced accordingly to avoid benzoate toxicity [Cusmai et al 2012].

For some older patients with severe glycine encephalopathy and difficult-to-control seizures, a vagal nerve stimulator has been used with varying (sometimes very high) levels of success [Tsao 2010].

Other. Gastrostomy tube placement should be considered early in the management of patients with swallowing dysfunction associated with severe disease.

Gastroesophageal reflux is common, and a Nissen procedure can be very helpful in reducing the risk of aspiration pneumonia.

Most affected individuals need physical therapy.

Scoliosis is managed with standard techniques.

Note: Although strychnine improves tone and respiration, its use has been abandoned because of serious side effects that result from its long-term use.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



There is no way to prevent primary manifestations of this disorder. Note: The effect of therapy in mildly affected children with pathogenic variants that result in residual enzyme activity is still under investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Patients on sodium benzoate should have plasma carnitine concentration monitored. Those with free carnitine below the lower limit of normal should receive supplementation to maintain normal plasma concentrations.

Surveillance



Developmental assessment should be performed throughout the first years of life.

Neurologic assessments in the first year can identify early development of spasticity in severely affected patients and early development of chorea in more mildly affected patients.

Severely affected individuals should be monitored for scoliosis.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Valproate is contraindicated in glycine encephalopathy as an antiepileptic drug (AED). It raises blood and CSF glycine concentrations and may increase seizure frequency. It has resulted in severe lethargy, coma, severe seizures, and chorea particularly in mildly affected patients [Hall & Ringel 2004; Author, personal observation].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Biochemical genetic testing to promote early diagnosis and treatment of at-risk newborn sibs is indicated. If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, such testing can be followed with molecular genetic testing.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Pregnancy has been reported in one woman with mild glycine encephalopathy. No obvious teratogenic effect was observed [Ellaway et al 2001].

There is currently no effective treatment for pregnancies in which the fetus is affected with glycine encephalopathy.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.