http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/nkx2-1-dis

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with an NKX2-1-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended: For benign hereditary chorea* Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor For brain-lung-thyroid syndrome (choreoathetosis*, congenital hypothyroidism, and neonatal respiratory distress) Lung Pulmonary function testing, if not performed at the time of diagnosis Pulmonary consultation for further evaluation and treatment of pulmonary dysfunction Screening for pulmonary malignancy with chest x-ray or CT scan of the chest Thyroid Thyroid function testing (TSH, T3, T4) for evaluation of possible hypothyroidism, if not performed at the time of diagnosis Endocrinology consultation for further evaluation and treatment of thyroid abnormalities Consider evaluation for thyroid malignancy by physical examination that includes thyroid palpation. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor *Note that brain MRI is typically obtained as part of the diagnostic evaluation.

Treatment of Manifestations

A multidisciplinary approach to the management of individuals with NKX2-1-related disorders is recommended. Chorea. Tetrabenazine, which has been reported to reduce chorea in low doses [Jankovic 2009, Salvatore et al 2010, Jankovic & Clarence-Smith 2011, Gras et al 2012, Jimenez-Shahed & Jankovic 2013], is a first-line treatment for chorea. Starting at low doses and gradually increasing to the dose most effective in controlling symptoms is recommended. Children: 0.5 mg/kg/day starting dose divided into 2-3 doses Adults: 37.5 mg/day starting dose divided in 2-3 doses Levodopa therapy has been reported to improve chorea in four children and can be considered as second-line therapy for the treatment of chorea [Asmus et al 2005, Rosati et al 2015]. Rosati et al [2015] and Asmus et al [2005] noted a dramatic and substantial improvement in gait symptoms (specifically falls) in the same four children with levodopa therapy; this medication can be used as first-line therapy in children with gait impairment. Of note: Although Devos et al [2006] found a beneficial effect of methylphenidate on chorea in one patient, methylphenidate is not recommended as first-line therapy for the treatment of chorea. Although Glik et al [2008] reported amelioration of choreic movements in an individual with benign hereditary chorea treated with olanzapine for psychosis, dopamine receptor blockers are not recommended as first-line therapy for the treatment of chorea. Other neurologic manifestations. Gross motor and gait abnormalities can occur during early development [Harper 1978]; physical therapy is recommended to address delays in motor and gait development identified in childhood. Pulmonary dysfunction. Treat asthma and interstitial lung disease as needed. Hypothyroidism. Thyroid hormone replacement therapy is recommended.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Neonatal screening for thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyroxine (T4) levels with appropriate thyroid replacement can prevent systemic sequelae of congenital hypothyroidism.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Screening and treatment of hypothyroidism can prevent the systematic sequelae of congenital hypothyroidism. Early and aggressive medical intervention for respiratory infections and asthma can prevent respiratory distress, intubation and/or death. Early intervention for motor development delays with physical therapy and/or medication for the treatment of chorea can improve function. Annual screening for pulmonary and thyroid cancer can reduce morbidity and mortality associated with malignancy with NKX2-1 related disorders.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate: For individuals with no neurologic manifestations or minimal symptoms: annual neurologic evaluation For individuals with no pulmonary manifestations or minimal symptoms: annual evaluation starting at the time of diagnosis for pulmonary dysfunction (pulmonary function tests) and pulmonary malignancy with chest x-ray or CT scan of the chest For individuals with no manifestations of thyroid disease or minimal symptoms: annual evaluation starting at the time of diagnosis for thyroid dysfunction (serum concentration of thyroid stimulating hormone) and for thyroid cancer (physical examination that includes thyroid palpation)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

No agents or circumstances are known to trigger or exacerbate NKX2-1-related disorders.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Evaluation of at-risk relatives prenatally or as soon as possible after birth enables early identification of infants at high risk for congenital hypothyroidism and pulmonary disease, permitting early diagnosis and management, and particularly, prevention of the neurodevelopmental consequences of untreated hypothyroidism. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the NKX2-1 pathogenic variant in the family is known; If a pathogenic variant has not been identified, assessment of thyroid function in a family with benign hereditary chorea or brain-lung-thyroid syndrome. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There is no known increased risk during pregnancy for a woman with an NKX2-1-related disorder. Prior to pregnancy or early in gestation, it is recommended that a woman work with her physician to determine the safety for the fetus of the use of any medication she is taking for chorea.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.