http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/norrie

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with NDP-related retinopathies, the following evaluations are recommended: Complete ophthalmologic examination Baseline audiologic evaluation Neurodevelopmental assessment in early childhood if developmental milestones are not met Behavioral evaluation as needed Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations


Ocular manifestations The majority of males with the classic Norrie disease (ND) phenotype have complete retinal detachment at the time of birth; therefore, interventional therapy may not offer much with regard to preservation of sight. Ophthalmologic evaluation is warranted.. Individuals without complete retinal detachment may benefit from surgery and/or laser therapy with the potential for improved outcomes if done at an early age. A report by Chow et al [2010] described successful laser photocoagulation at birth (37 weeks’ gestation) of a male with ND in which Teller visual acuity was measured at 20/100 O.D. at 23 months of life Retrospective medical record review of all patients seen in a tertiary care pediatric retinal clinical practice (1988-2008) of 14 males with ND documented maintenance of light perception in at least one eye (7/14 cases) with early vitrectomy done by age 12 months (median 4.5 months) [Walsh et al 2010]. In the progressive stage of the Norrie disease phenotype, development of increased intraocular pressure may require surgery. Rarely, enucleation of the eye is required to control pain. 
Sensorineural hearing loss Hearing aid augmentation is usually successful well into middle or late adulthood. Cochlear implantation should be considered when hearing-assisted audiologic function is significantly impaired. Behavioral issues are a lifelong challenge to many individuals with Norrie disease and to their guardians/caretakers, whether or not intellectual disability or cognitive impairment is present. Intervention and therapy are supportive and aimed at maximizing educational opportunities. An empiric trial of psychotropic medications may be warranted, although no studies have addressed or supported the use of specific medications for treatment of Norrie disease.

Surveillance

The following are recommended: Routine follow up with an ophthalmologist in all individuals with an NDP-related retinopathy, even when vision is severely reduced Given that most individuals with the NDP-related spectrum of retinopathies are blind, routine monitoring of hearing so that hearing loss can be detected early and managed appropriately Observation for clinical evidence of venous stasis or ulcer disease

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Given the increased risk of hearing loss, exposure to loud noises should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes

Pregnancy Management

A planned delivery at 34 weeks’ gestation of a male with an established NDP pathogenic variant (in whom retinal detachment was excluded following fetal ultrasonography at 28 and 33 weeks) was reported [Sisk et al 2014]. Authors describe treatment at two days of life with laser ablation of the avascular retina in both eyes and ten-month follow up which showed the retina to remain completely attached in both eyes [Sisk et al 2014].

Therapies Under Investigation

Ohlmann et al [2005] have elaborated in the mouse knockout a failure of retinal angiogenesis and documented correction of the ocular-vascular phenotype by transgenic ectopic lens expression of norrin. These authors also noted a potential effect of norrin on retinal ganglion cell proliferation. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.