http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/npc

Management

Clinical management guidelines for Niemann-Pick C have been published [Patterson et al 2012].

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC), the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment of ability to walk and transfer, manage secretions, and communicate (language, speech, and hearing) For individuals with hepatosplenomegaly, complete blood count and tests of hepatic function MRI of the head; usually performed in the course of the workup and usually normal until the disease is advanced Consideration of EEG and sleep studies if the history suggests seizures or sleep disturbances Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

No curative therapy for NPC exists. Symptomatic therapy may be at least partially effective in the management of seizures, dystonia, and cataplexy. If disordered sleep is identified, a nocturnal sedative may be indicated. In complex cases, formal evaluation by a sleep specialist should be considered. Bronchoalveolar lavage has been described as effective in improving function in one child with pulmonary infiltrates [Palmeri et al 2005]. General supportive care, including respite for primary caregivers, is crucial to the maintenance of the family unit in the face of this devastating illness.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Chest physical therapy with aggressive bronchodilation and antibiotic therapy for intercurrent infection appears beneficial, although no systematic study has been performed. Individuals whose mobility is compromised should have a regular bowel program to prevent severe constipation, which may present as increased seizure frequency or increased spasticity in some impaired individuals with NPC. Physical therapy is indicated to maintain mobility as long as possible. Swallowing must be monitored to allow consideration of gastrostomy tube placement when aspiration or nutritional compromise is imminent.

Surveillance

General pediatric evaluations, with special attention to pulmonary function, swallowing, bowel habit, and mood (for occult depression) at six-month intervals are appropriate for most juvenile and adult affected individuals. Sleep disturbances are common in NPC; the affected individual or caregiver should be questioned regarding sleep hygiene as a part of regular evaluation. Annual psychometric testing may be helpful in arranging appropriate school or work placement. Teenagers and adults with motor or sensory impairments who are driving should be monitored at six- to 12-month intervals to ensure that they do not present a risk to themselves or others.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Drugs that cause excessive salivation or that may exacerbate seizures directly by interacting with antiepileptic drugs should be avoided. Alcohol as well as many drugs exacerbate ataxia and should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Inhibition of glycosphingolipid synthesis by n-butyldeoxynojirimycin has been shown to delay onset and prolong survival in both murine and feline models of NPC [Zervas et al 2001, Stein et al 2012]. A prospective trial of the same agent showed evidence of stabilization or benefit in some individuals [Patterson et al 2007]. Subsequent clinical studies have supported a role of miglustat in stabilizing NPC [Pineda et al 2009, Wraith & Imrie 2009, Patterson et al 2010, Pineda et al 2010, Wraith et al 2010, Fecarotta et al 2011, Di Rocco et al 2012, Héron et al 2012, Chien et al 2013]. The agent has been approved for the management of neurologic manifestations of NPC in several countries, not including the United States. Laboratory studies of cellular and murine models of NPC have raised the possibility of small-molecule therapies to interdict pathways triggering apoptosis and related routes to cell death and dysfunction [Patterson & Platt 2004]; to date, these have not proceeded to clinical trials. Preliminary studies of neurosteroid replacement therapy with allopregnanolone in NPC mice suggested similar improvements in survival to those seen with n-butyldeoxynojirimycin, provided that the steroid is administered early in postnatal life [Mellon & Griffin 2002]. Subsequent studies have shown that the active agent was the vehicle, hydroxypropyl beta cyclodextrin, which has shown dramatic effects in the murine model of NPC [Abi-Mosleh et al 2009, Davidson et al 2009, Ramirez et al 2010, Rosenbaum et al 2010, Ward et al 2010, Vance & Peake 2011, Peake & Vance 2012]. Studies in tissue culture have demonstrated that direct or indirect over-expression of the GTPase Rab 9 reverses the NPC phenotype [Choudhury et al 2002, Walter et al 2003]. Although not yet applicable in human trials, this finding suggests the existence of alternate pathways for mobilization of endosomal cargoes that are potential targets for small-molecule therapies. Treatment of certain NPC fibroblast cell lines with an HDAC inhibitor produced marked reduction of cholesterol storage [Pipalia et al 2011]; a clinical trial is being considered. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

In the C57 murine model of NPC, all treatment modalities, including bone marrow transplantation, combined bone marrow and liver transplantation, and aggressive cholesterol-lowering therapy, have proven ineffective. Although a trial of cholesterol-lowering agents showed that the amount of free cholesterol in the liver of individuals with NPC could be reduced by the administration of cholestyramine, lovastatin, and nicotinic acid [Patterson et al 1993], there is no evidence that this approach modifies the neurologic progression of NPC. Liver transplantation in humans corrects hepatic dysfunction but does not ameliorate the neurologic disease.