http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/nsdhl-dis

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with CHILD syndrome, the following are recommended: Dermatologic evaluation Radiologic examination of trunk and extremities for skeletal malformations Abdominal and pelvic ultrasounds examination to identify visceral malformations Chest imaging to evaluate for lung hypoplasia Echocardiogram to identify cardiac involvement Magnetic resonance imaging to determine brain involvement Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with CK syndrome, the following are recommended: Measurement of height, weight, and head circumference Evaluation of neurologic history and EEG for evidence of seizures Psychoeducational evaluations to define delays and facilitate appropriate interventions Psychiatric evaluation if behavioral problems are present Ophthalmologic consultation for evaluation of ocular findings including strabismus and optic atrophy Orthopedic evaluation to determine the presence of scoliosis/kyphosis Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations


CHILD syndrome Oral aromatic retinoids (etretinate) to ameliorate cutaneous symptoms; however, this drug is often poorly tolerated [Happle et al 1980] and does not prove effective in every case [Liu et al 2015]. Topical treatments including lactic acid 12% creams or lotions for itching and urea creams for dry skin. Oral and topical ketoconazole were found to result in a 90% reduction of cutaneous lesions after ten days of therapy [Liu et al 2015]. Topical statins. The use of lovastatin topically led to complete healing of the inflammatory CHILD nevus in a few single cases, whereas cholesterol application alone had no satisfactory effect [Merino De Paz et al 2011, Paller et al 2011]. Alexopoulos & Kakourou [2015] recently reported the combined topical use of simvastatin and cholesterol and showed a correction in the cutaneous phenotype of one patient. Dermatologic surgery. An inflammatory nevus was removed from an affected boy by dermabrasion; however, it recurred within eight months [Happle et al 1996]. König et al [2010] reported successful treatment of an inflammatory nevus by grafting skin obtained from a contralateral unaffected region. Note: No one therapy described to date appears to ameliorate the cutaneous findings for every reported individual with CHILD syndrome. Trying different methods until the clinician finds a successful therapy seems to be typical for most affected individuals. Orthopedic abnormalities. Treatment of orthopedic abnormalities such as scoliosis and joint contractures with braces and/or corrective surgery Other medical care as appropriate based on clinical findings 
CK syndrome Antiepileptic drugs (AED) to control seizures Behavior modification and/or drug therapy to control aggression and help with ADHD symptoms Ophthalmologic management of ocular abnormalities

Surveillance


CHILD syndrome Regular surveillance for cutaneous manifestations as new lesions may occur in puberty or early adulthood Orthopedic surveillance for musculoskeletal deformities such as scoliosis and joint contractures Neurologic, cardiologic, or renal surveillance depending on clinical involvement 
CK syndrome Neurologic surveillance of seizures for readjustment of medications if necessary Orthopedic surveillance for scoliosis/kyphosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.