http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/oca2

Management



Evaluation Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with oculocutaneous albinism (OCA), the following evaluations are recommended: Evaluation of the pigmentation status of the skin and adnexa (eyebrows, eyelashes, and where appropriate, pubic hair) Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Correction of refractive errors with spectacles or (when age-appropriate) contact lenses of the refractive errors of either hyperopia or myopia and astigmatism found in most individuals with albinism can optimize visual acuity. Of note, visual acuity is never correctable to normal. Strabismus surgery is usually not mandatory (because the strabismus in most individuals with albinism is not associated with the development of amblyopia); however, if the strabismus is marked or fixed, surgery can be considered to improve peripheral binocular fusion or appearance. When an anomalous null point creates a substantial face turn, strabismus surgery may reposition the null point into a more central, straight-ahead location to allow more socially acceptable head position. Photodysphoria (discomfort in bright light; as distinct from ‘photophobia, painful aversion of light associated with intraocular inflammation) is common among individuals with OCA; however, the severity of discomfort varies and is not completely concordant with the amount of pigment present in the iris or the skin. Dark glasses or transition lenses may be helpful, but many individuals with albinism prefer to go without the tint because of the reduction in vision from the dark lenses. Note: Going without dark glasses does not harm vision. Darkly tinted contact lenses do not improve visual function because the reduction of transmission of the thin contact lens is no match for the density of a tinted spectacle lens. A hat with a brim (such as a baseball hat with a visor) is helpful to reduce overhead glare and to reduce some photodysphoria and to provide some sun protection to the face. Skin care in OCA2 is determined by the amount of pigment in the skin and the cutaneous response to sunlight. Individuals with white skin that does not tan need to be protected from any prolonged sun exposure for prevention of burning, skin damage, and skin cancer. This can be for exposures as short as five to ten minutes in highly sensitive individuals and 30 minutes or more in less sensitive individuals. Prolonged periods in the sun require skin protection with clothing (hats with brims, and long sleeves, pants, and socks) and appropriate sunscreens after the guidance and education from a dermatologist. Even early in life, a (pediatric) dermatologic consultation is warranted to teach parents about the use of sun-protective clothing and interpretation of the often confusing numerical values and contents of sun-protective lotions and formulas. Skin cancer is treated as for the general population.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 No dietary or ophthalmologic procedures or exercises will prevent or alter the clinical features of albinism.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Annual ophthalmologic examination and reassessment and accurate correction of refractive errors, and related strabismus or face turn Annual to biennial search for evidence of sun-related skin damage and pre-cancerous or cancerous lesions, especially in areas of high intensity or prolonged sunlight exposure

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Prolonged unprotected sun exposure should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Relatives at risk for OCA2 can be identified by clinical findings (hypopigmentation and eye features); additional testing is not indicated. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 No form of classic OCA impairs fertility or compromises pregnancy or gestation. An obligate carrier (heterozygous) fetus of a mother with OCA2 faces no additional risks over an unaffected fetus of an unaffected mother.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.