http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/oca4

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with oculocutaneous albinism type 4 (OCA4), the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed: Complete ophthalmologic evaluation including measurement of visual acuity and refractive error Assessment for strabismus Assessment by dermatologist to instruct parents regarding use of sun-protective clothing, lotions, and formulas Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Ophthalmologic care is the most important part of the ongoing care for most individuals with OCA4. The majority of individuals with albinism have significant hyperopia or myopia and astigmatism. Correction of these refractive errors with spectacles or contact lenses can improve visual acuity. Except in the very unusual individual, correction of refractive errors cannot restore visual acuity to normal because of the foveal hypoplasia. The alternating strabismus found in most individuals with albinism is generally not associated with the development of amblyopia. Strabismus surgery is usually not required, but can be considered for cosmetic reasons if the strabismus is marked or fixed. Photophobia is common in individuals with OCA4, but the degree of discomfort varies and does not depend entirely on the amount of melanin pigment present in the iris or skin. In general, opaque contact lenses or darkly tinted lenses do not improve visual function. Dark glasses may be helpful for individuals with albinism, but many prefer to go without dark glasses because of the reduction in vision from the dark lenses. A hat with a brim (e.g., a baseball hat with a visor) is often the best way to achieve reduction in photophobia and sun protection. Protection from the sun through the wearing of protective clothing and the regular application of sunscreen is essential to prevent sunburn and secondary skin changes, and to decrease the risk of skin cancer in later life. Regular skin check-ups for skin cancer are recommended for adult individuals with OCA4, especially in cases of severe hypopigmentation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Individuals with OCA4 should stay out of the sun from an early age, as cumulative ultraviolet exposure is a major risk factor for skin cancers (see Skin Cancer Risk). Prolonged periods in the sun require skin protection with clothing (hats with brims, long sleeves and pants, socks) and sunscreen with a high SPF number (total blocks with SPF 45-50+). There is no scientific evidence to indicate how high an SPF value is enough; individuals with OCA4 should use sunscreen with higher SPF values (45-50+) to lessen as much as possible the cumulative effect of ultraviolet to their skin.

Surveillance

Annual ophthalmologic examination and reassessment for accurate correction of refractive error are appropriate. There is no definitive guideline supported by scientific evidence as to how often an individual should be evaluated by a dermatologist, though an evaluation of the skin for cancer screening every six months is recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid prolonged exposure of the skin to the sun.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.