

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) or later-onset CCHS (LO-CCHS), the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment in a pediatric respiratory physiology laboratory, with: Clinical study of spontaneous breathing awake and asleep including (at a minimum) tidal volume, respiratory inductance plethysmography of the chest and abdomen, hemoglobin saturation with pulse waveform, end-tidal carbon dioxide level with visible waveform, and electrocardiogram; and Evaluation of the awake and asleep responses to exogenous and endogenous challenges of hypercarbia and/or hypoxemia. Venous or arterial blood gas or serum bicarbonate level to look for elevated carbon dioxide content at the time of presentation Hemoglobin, hematocrit, and reticulocyte count to assess for polycythemia 72-hour Holter recording to assess for abrupt, prolonged asystoles Echocardiogram to assess for changes consistent with right ventricular hypertrophy and cor pulmonale Neurocognitive assessment to determine baseline function Comprehensive autonomic testing of all organ systems regulated by the ANS, including but not limited to pupillometry, head up-tilt testing, thermoregulatory chamber sweat testing, Q-Sweat testing, heart rate deep breathing, Valsalva maneuver, and measures of regional blood flow in activities of daily living as well as orthostatic testing. Clinical genetics consultation See Table 4 for additional details.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Ventilatory support. The treatment goals for classic CCHS are to secure the airway and to use chronic ventilatory support at home to compensate for the altered/absent ventilatory responses to hypoxemia and hypercarbia. Of note, although oxygen administration without artificial ventilation improves the PaO2 (partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood) and relieves cyanosis, it is not an adequate treatment of hypoventilation. Because individuals with CCHS may experience complete respiratory arrest or severe hypoventilation and, thus, the sequelae of hypoxemia, they require monitoring of objective measures of oxygenation (i.e., pulse oximeter) and ventilation (i.e., PETco2 monitor) continuously during sleep and at regular intervals while awake. They also require observation and continuous care, especially during all sleep, by an RN trained and experienced in ventilator management. For each of the options listed below, the goal is to provide the affected individual with the technology optimal for her/his life style needs. Typically, the infant needing ventilatory support 24 hours per day is most safely and effectively supported via tracheostomy and use of a home mechanical ventilator. Tracheostomy is also recommended for children and adults who require ventilator support during sleep only. As children who require continuous ventilatory support become ambulatory, diaphragm pacing by phrenic nerve stimulation can be considered to allow for increased mobility and improved quality of life. Diaphragm pacing is not typically recommended for the young child who requires only nighttime ventilatory support because the benefits do not outweigh the risks; however, for older adolescents and young adults, this could be an appropriate consideration. Tracheal decannulation is not assured in affected individuals who use diaphragm pacing during sleep. Diaphragm pacers for the active child with CCHS should be implanted at each phrenic nerve in the chest, ideally by thoracoscopic technique [Weese-Mayer et al 1996, Shaul et al 2002, Chin et al 2012]. Older infants, toddlers, and children with diaphragm pacers should be assessed for use of a Passy-Muir one-way speaking valve while awake, allowing for vocalization and use of the upper airway on exhalation. Children with diaphragm pacers may be assessed for capping of the tracheostomy tube while awake and paced, thereby allowing for inspiration and exhalation via the upper airway; tracheostomy is typically still required for mechanical ventilation during sleep to avoid upper airway obstruction and physiologic compromise. Although not yet accomplished, the older child with an entirely normal airway may be able to eliminate the need for a tracheostomy by relying on diaphragm pacing while awake and on mask ventilation while asleep; however, such a child may require interim endotracheal intubation to allow for optimal oxygenation and ventilation during acute illness that requires more aggressive ventilatory management. Cooperative older children with CCHS who consistently require ventilatory support only while sleeping may be candidates for noninvasive support with either mask ventilation or negative-pressure ventilation; however, this must be done with careful consideration of each child’s needs. If successful, tracheal decannulation can be considered (with the caveat that in the event of severe illness, interim endotracheal intubation may be required in a pediatric intensive care unit). The child who normally requires ventilatory support during sleep only may, during an intercurrent illness, also require artificial ventilation both awake and asleep. Note: Straus et al [2010] reported that the ventilatory response to hypercarbia seemed to improve with the use of oral contraceptives in two young women heterozygous for 20/25 and 20/26 genotypes. Ongoing studies have not confirmed this report. Cardiac. Prolonged transient asystoles may present as syncope and/or staring spells, and may be of such significant duration (≥3.0 seconds) as to warrant placement of a cardiac pacemaker for management [Silvestri et al 2000, Gronli et al 2008]. Hirschsprung disease. See Hirschsprung Disease Overview. Tumors of neural crest origin. Neuroblastomas are removed surgically and followed by chemotherapy if they have advanced beyond Stage 1. Other tumors of neural crest origin are treated individually by location and type, though surgical removal is typically recommended.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Mask ventilation in the infant and young child is strongly discouraged. Mask ventilation is not adequately stable as a life-sustaining support, with risk for repeated hypoxemia and neurocognitive compromise in the infant and young child. If mask ventilation is used, an actual ventilator is needed as the traditional Bi-PAP machine is not approved for life-sustaining support. Also, close longitudinal follow up by specialists with craniofacial and dental expertise is essential as the potential for doing harm with facial deformation is an important consideration and may necessitate midface advancement in the teen years.

Surveillance

 For all individuals with CCHS, the following evaluations are recommended: At least yearly (every 6 months until age 3 years) comprehensive, multiple-day in-hospital physiologic evaluation (see Table 4) Yearly echocardiogram to identify right ventricular hypertrophy and/or cor pulmonale Yearly hemoglobin, hematocrit, and reticulocyte counts to identify polycythemia Table 4 summarizes the recommended clinical evaluations for affected individuals with CCHS based on the PHOX2B variant present. Clinical Evaluations to Characterize CCHS Phenotype Based on PHOX2B Variant Adapted from Weese-Mayer et al [2010] PARM = polyalanine repeat expansion mutation with number of repeats on each allele, e.g., 20/24 NPARM = non-polyalanine repeat expansion mutation (i.e., missense, nonsense, frameshift, stop codon) Note: In infants and those newly diagnosed with LO-CCHS the recommendation is for above-described evaluation every 6 months until age 3 years (or 3 years from the LO-CCHS diagnosis). Awake and asleep physiologic testing in varying levels of concentration and activity simulating activities of daily living; exogenous and endogenous gas challenges; comprehensive age-appropriate clinical autonomic testing Annual chest and abdominal imaging to identify ganglioneuromas and ganglioneuroblastomas and potentially neuroblastomas Chest and abdominal imaging and urine cathecholamines every 3 months in the first 2 years, then every 6 months until age 7 years to identify neuroblastomas Exon or whole-gene deletion or duplication

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Ideally, children with CCHS should not go swimming. If they do, they should be carefully supervised, regardless of the presence or absence of a tracheostomy. Children with CCHS should not compete in underwater swimming contests as they cannot perceive the asphyxia that occurs with drowning and breath-holding and, therefore, are likely to swim longer and farther than children without CCHS, thereby increasing the risk of drowning. Furthermore, breath-holding contests can lead to asphyxia and/or death. Alcohol (respiratory depression), recreational drugs (varied effects), and prescribed as well as non-prescribed medications/sedatives/anesthetics that could induce respiratory depression should be avoided [Chen et al 2006].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 The molecular genetic test method used to evaluate parents, children, and at-risk sibs of individuals with CCHS depends on the pathogenic variant identified in the proband (see Testing Strategy). Parents of children with a known PHOX2B variant should be tested for the family-specific variant to determine their risk for later-onset CCHS or mosaicism. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Though not prospectively evaluated, the ventilatory needs of a pregnant woman with CCHS warrant careful consideration by the obstetrician.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.