http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/opa

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual with optic atrophy type 1 (OPA1), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of visual acuity, color vision, and visual fields

Assessment of extraocular muscles (the affected individual is asked to follow the ophthalmoscope with his/her eyes without moving the head)

Hearing evaluation: auditory brain stem responses (ABRs), auditory evoked potentials (AEPs), and evoked otoacoustic emissions

Oral glucose tolerance test

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



No treatment for OPA1 is of proven efficacy.

Treatment of decreased visual acuity is symptomatic (e.g., low-vision aids).

For treatment of sensorineural hearing loss, see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview.

For treatment of ataxia, see Ataxia Overview.

Surveillance



Appropriate surveillance includes:

Annual ophthalmologic examination, including measurement of visual acuity and visual fields and optical coherence tomography (OCT);

Annual hearing evaluation.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Individuals with an OPA1 pathogenic variant are advised:

Not to smoke;

To moderate their alcohol intake;

To use sunglasses to limit UV exposure;

Note: While limiting UV exposure is a good practice, no evidence for its effectiveness exists.

To avoid medications (antibiotics, antivirals) that interfere with mitochondrial metabolism.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



A study using the antioxidant EPI-743 in individuals with autosomal dominant optic atrophy (ADOA), including persons with OPA1, is in preparation in Italy (Dr. Valerio Carelli, University of Bologna).

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.