http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/opd

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with otopalatodigital (OPD) spectrum disorders, the following evaluations are recommended: Full clinical examination Full radiologic skeletal survey Audiometry (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview) Ear, nose, and throat examination Renal tract ultrasound examination Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Deafness is managed with hearing aids (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). The conductive hearing loss can be caused by fused and misshapen ossicles; attempts to separate the ossicles are usually unsuccessful and can lead to formation of a perilymphatic gusher. Stridor in the neonatal period on account of laryngeal stenosis rarely requires surgical intervention and is non-progressive with growth. Cosmetic surgery to correct the fronto-orbital deformity has been attempted in some individuals. Re-growth post surgery does not seem to occur [Kung & Sloan 1998]. Hand and foot malformations may also require surgery. 
                Orthopedic surgery Surgical correction of limb bowing has not been reported. Several individuals have had scoliosis surgically addressed, with satisfactory results. Chest expansion surgery has been attempted in several individuals with Melnick-Needles syndrome, with only marginal clinical benefit. Apnea prevention. Micrognathia and tracheobronchomalacia in severely affected individuals can lead to airway collapse and sleep apnea that have been successfully corrected with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) [Lan et al 2006] and mandibular distraction in the most severe instances of MNS.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Anesthetists should be aware of the associated laryngeal stenosis, if intubation and ventilation are required [Leggett 1988, Mehta & Schou 1988].

Surveillance

 Clinical evaluation for development of orthopedic manifestations (e.g., hand contractures in FMD, scoliosis in FMD and MNS) is appropriate. Head size and shape should be monitored as part of the surveillance for evolving craniosynostosis. Monitoring of hearing loss should be ongoing, as the sensorineural component can be progressive.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Consider molecular genetic testing for the family-specific mutation in all at-risk relatives Because affected individuals may benefit from early evaluations for hearing loss and orthopedic complications, including scoliosis, molecular genetic testing for the family-specific mutation in all at-risk relatives should be considered. If molecular genetic testing is not an option for an at-risk child, evaluations for hearing loss and orthopedic complications, including scoliosis, should be instituted as soon as possible after a clinical diagnosis is established in the at-risk relative. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.