

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and the needs of an individual diagnosed with oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD), the following evaluations are recommended: Evaluation for swallowing difficulties by history and in more severe cases with a videoendoscopic swallowing study (VESS) and/or videofluoroscopic swallowing study (VFSS) [Dodds et al 1990, Langmore et al 1991, St Guily et al 1995, Périé et al 1998].  VESS gives indirect signs of upper esophageal sphincter (UES) dysfunction  VFSS gives a direct evaluation of the UES using radiopaque barite in the tracheobronchial tree  The drink test, a global quantitative functional evaluation of swallowing, is abnormal when it takes longer than seven seconds to drink 80 mL of ice-cold water [Bouchard et al 1992, Brais et al 1995]. Questionnaires can also be used to evaluate the degree of dysphagia (i.e., the Mc Horney score [McHorney et al 2002] and the Salassa grade [Salassa 1999]. Neuromuscular examination performed by a neurologist to determine overall disease progression and the presence (and severity) of ptosis, dysphagia, proximal weakness, and the presence or absence of any other neurologic findings Consideration of muscle biopsy in those cases with more severe or complicated presentations Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 
            Ptosis
           Surgery is recommended when ptosis interferes with vision or appears to cause cervical pain secondary to constant dorsiflexion of the neck. The two types of blepharoplasty used to correct the ptosis are resection of the levator palpebrae aponeurosis and frontal suspension of the eyelids [Codere 1993].  Resection of the aponeurosis is easily done, but usually needs to be repeated once or twice [Rodrigue & Molgat 1997].  Frontal suspension of the eyelids uses a thread of muscle fascia as a sling; the fascia is inserted through the tarsal plate of the upper eyelid and the ends are attached in the frontalis muscle, which is relatively preserved in OPMD [Codere 1993]. The major advantage of frontal suspension of the eyelids is that it is permanent; however, the procedure requires general anesthesia.  
            Dysphagia
           Food should be cut into small pieces.  Although no controlled trials have been performed [Hill et al 2004], surgical intervention for dysphagia should be considered when symptomatic dysphagia is accompanied by marked weight loss, near-fatal choking, and/or recurrent pneumonia [Duranceau et al 1983, St Guily et al 1995, Périé et al 1997, Coiffier et al 2006].  Cricopharyngeal myotomy, consisting of extramucosal section of the cricopharyngeal muscle that improves swallowing through the upper esophageal sphincter [Montgomery & Lynch 1971, Duranceau et al 1980, St Guily et al 1994, St Guily et al 1995, Duranceau 1997], is easily performed and immediately improves symptoms in most cases [Duranceau et al 1983]; however, in a very high proportion of patients progressive dysphagia recurs within years [Coiffier et al 2006]. 

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 The major complications of OPMD are aspiration pneumonia, weight loss, and social withdrawal because of frequent choking while eating. To reduce the risk for these complications: Annual flu vaccination is recommended for elderly affected individuals  Consultation should be sought promptly for a productive cough because of the increased risk for lung abscesses.  Dietary supplements should be added if weight loss is significant.  When eating in social settings, affected individuals should either avoid eating or choose foods that are easy to swallow.  General anesthesia is not contraindicated even though individuals with OPMD may respond differently to certain anesthetics [Caron et al 2005].

Surveillance

 The frequency of follow-up neurologic evaluations depends on the degree of ptosis, dysphagia, and muscle weakness. Perform routine ophthalmologic evaluation o determine if ptosis interferes with driving or is associated with neck pain, and or if the eyelids cover more than 50% of the pupil, findings that might lead to consideration of surgical intervention. Perform routine reevaluation for functional signs of dysphagia using videoscopy and fiberoscopy.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Repetitive dilatations of the upper-esophageal sphincter with bougies [Mathieu et al 1997, Manjaly et al 2012] and botulinum toxin injection of the cricopharyngeal muscle [Restivo et al 2000] have been suggested as treatment for dysphagia.  An autologous cell transplantation clinical phase I/IIa study (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00773227) has also been recently described [Périé et al 2014]. The trial was based on the observation that cells isolated from unaffected muscles of persons with OPMD are able to proliferate and differentiate normally, whereas cells isolated from affected muscles have reduced myogenicity (ability to proliferate and differentiate normally) [Périé et al 2006]. The therapeutic strategy is to isolate muscle progenitors (myoblasts) from clinically unaffected muscles of persons with OPMD and implant them into dystrophic pharyngeal muscles to reinforce their motor ability and restore contractility and, thus, reduce the dysphagia. The conclusions of this trial on 12 patients with OPMD support the hypothesis that an injection of autologous myoblasts into pharyngeal muscles is a safe and efficient procedure [Périé et al 2014]. In cellular models of OPMD, investigators have reduced cellular toxicity by inducing heat shock protein expression using ZnSO4, 8-hydroxyquinoline, ibuprofen, and indomethacin [Wang et al 2005] or exposing cells to an anti-PABPN1 single-domain antibody called intrabody that interferes with oligomerization [Verheesen et al 2006]. These intrabodies also reduced intranuclear inclusion (INI) formation and symptoms related to OPMD in a drosophila OPMD model [Chartier et al 2009]. More recently, investigators have tested molecules that interfere with the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway such as lithium chloride [Abu-Baker et al 2013]. In a transgenic mouse model of OPMD, investigators have reduced inclusion formation and cell death with agents that interfere with protein aggregation such as doxycycline [Davies et al 2005] and trehalose [Davies et al 2006].These studies suggest that therapeutic trials in OPMD are possible given that some of the tested molecules have already been given to humans.  Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.