

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed: Plasma ammonia concentration Plasma amino acid analysis Laboratory values that reflect nutritional status (e.g., vitamin D level, ferritin, pre-albumin) Liver function tests (liver enzymes, bilirubin, albumin) PT/PTT and fibrinogen Developmental/neuropsychological/psychological evaluation Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment is best provided by a clinical geneticist and a nutritionist experienced in the treatment of metabolic disease.

Care of Hyperammonemic Coma

 Care should be provided by a team coordinated by a metabolic specialist in a tertiary care center experienced in the management of individuals with OTC deficiency. In the acute phase, the mainstays of treatment are the following. 
              Rapid lowering of the plasma ammonia
             Level should be 200 μmol/L or lower even if a diagnosis has not yet been established because of the severely toxic effect of an elevated ammonia level on the brain. The fastest method for lowering the ammonia level is hemodialysis [Tuchman 1992, McBryde et al 2004]: A neonate should not be hemodialysed longer than four hours and should then be switched to hemofiltration for stabilization to prevent a rebound of the ammonia level. An older individual can be dialysed longer and should also be switched to hemofiltration for stabilization. Depending on the height of the ammonia level (≤1500 μmol/L), one can also start with high flow hemofiltration methods to achieve a similarly speedy reduction of the ammonia level and then switch to regular hemofiltration for stabilization to prevent a rebound of the ammonia level. Note: Peritoneal dialysis is ineffective for management of acute hyperammonemia and is not recommended. 
              Ammonia scavenger therapy
             Treatment allows an alternative pathway for the excretion of excess nitrogen (see Table 2). Nitrogen scavenger therapy is available as an intravenous infusion of a mixture of sodium phenylacetate and sodium benzoate for acute management and as an oral preparation of phenylbutyrate or sodium benzoate for long-term maintenance therapy. Citrulline is supplemented at 170 mg/kg/day or 3.8g/m2/day (enterally). Intravenous (IV) Ammonia Scavenger Therapy Protocol used in OTC Deficiency and Carbamyl Phosphate Synthetase I (CPSI) Deficiency 
                    Batshaw et al [2001]
                   Loading dose given over 90 to 120 minutes Maintenance dose given over 24 hours If an affected individual has symptomatic hyperammonemia and has not received a full dose of ammonia scavenger in the previous 12 hours, the affected person should first receive an IV bolus directly followed by maintenance infusion. Sodium phenylacetate/sodium benzoate must be diluted with sterile 10% dextrose before administration. The typical dilution is 1:10. Arginine infusion not to exceed 150mg/kg/h 
              Reversal of catabolism
             Provide calories from glucose and fat, and resume protein intake (in the form of natural protein and an essential amino acid mix) no later than 24 hours after protein intake was discontinued Note: Persons on hemodialysis or hemofiltration in particular need adequate nutrition to overcome catabolism because nutrients are removed by these procedures. Discontinuation of protein intake should not exceed 24 hours because deficiency of essential amino acids results in muscle breakdown and uncontrolled nitrogen release. Daily quantitative plasma amino acid analysis should guide nutritional therapy, the goal of which is to keep essential amino acid levels in the normal range. Use of a high glucose infusion rate supported by continuous insulin infusion to maintain high set point normoglycemia (140 mg/dL) as needed. For a newborn in crisis the goal is to deliver at least 100 kcal/kg/day, mostly from glucose and fat. 
              Reducing the risk of neurologic damage
             Affected individuals who are intubated and sedated may not show clinical signs of seizures, which are prevalent in acute hyperammonemia. EEG surveillance is thus highly recommended to allow electroencephalographic detection and subsequent treatment of seizures. Note: Phenobarbital is removed by dialysis and valproic acid is contraindicated in urea cycle disorders. The use of hypothermia for neuroprotection in hyperammonemia has long been proposed [Vaquero & Butterworth 2007] but has yet to be proven efficacious. A pilot study showed feasibility and safety (see Therapies Under Investigation). No other interventions (besides lowering the ammonia level) have proven efficacy for neuroprotection in hyperammonemic coma due to a urea cycle disorder or other conditions.

Long-Term Treatment

 Long-term treatment (including restriction of protein intake, use of nitrogen scavengers, and in some cases liver transplantation) is aimed at promoting growth and development and preventing hyperammonemic episodes. Protein intake
should be restricted to the required dietary allowance (RDA) for protein or the minimum amount necessary to allow growth and prevent catabolism depending on the severity of the disease. Use of an essential amino acid mixture is generally necessary to maintain normal essential amino acid levels in those on significant protein restriction, even persons with partial OTC deficiency. The diet should also provide vitamins, minerals, and trace elements, either in a calorie-rich, protein-free formula or in the form of supplements. Although protein restriction is the mainstay of therapy, when protein intake is too low, catabolism can cause chronic hyperammonemia just as high protein intake does. Careful monitoring of plasma amino acid concentrations is necessary to detect essential amino acid deficiencies. High glutamine concentrations are interpreted as evidence of poor metabolic control and chronic hyperammonemia. Nitrogen scavengers provide alternative routes for nitrogen disposal and allow more protein intake [Batshaw et al 2001, Berry & Steiner 2001]. Although it removes only half as much nitrogen as phenylbutyrate, oral sodium benzoate is the ammonia scavenger of choice in European countries and Australia rather than phenylbutyrate because it is felt to have fewer side effects. Phenylbutyrate causes menstrual dysfunction and body odor, and appears to deplete branched chain amino acids; sodium benzoate causes hypokalemia due to increased renal losses of potassium [Scaglia et al 2004, Häberle et al 2012]. Recommendations for ammonia scavenger therapy: Long-term ammonia scavenger treatment may consist of 450-600 mg/kg/day of sodium phenylbutyrate and 170 mg/kg/day of L-citrulline in children <25 kg, and 9.9-13.0 g/m2/day of sodium phenylbutyrate and 3.8 g/m2/day of L-citrulline in individuals weighing ≥25 kg. Treatment should be accompanied by an appropriate low-protein diet [Batshaw et al 2001]. Note: (1) Citrulline offers the advantage over arginine of incorporating aspartate into the pathway thus pulling one additional nitrogen molecule into the urea cycle. (2) Sodium benzoate is being used instead of sodium phenylbutyrate in conjunction with L-citrulline. The recommended dose is ≤250 mg/kg/d in children <25 kg and a maximum of 12 g/d [Häberle et al 2012]. Glycerol phenylbutyrate, which is significantly more palatable than sodium phenylbutyrate, is another treatment option. It has the same mechanism of action as sodium phenylbutyrate. Liver transplantation. No matter how mild OTC deficiency appears to be, stressors can at any age precipitate a hyperammonemic crisis that becomes life threatening. The fear of such an event, along with the restrictions on daily living imposed by the dietary therapy, prompt many families to consider liver transplantation even if the disease has been manageable up to that point with diet and medication. In severe, neonatal-onset urea cycle disorders, liver transplantation remains the most effective means of preventing further hyperammonemic crises and neurodevelopmental deterioration [Leonard & McKiernan 2004]. It is typically performed by age six months. Females and males with partial OTC deficiency can, after diagnosis, be maintained on a low-protein diet and oral ammonia scavenger treatment for life; the need for liver transplant depends on the individual and is typically considered when an affected individual is unstable and has frequent hyperammonemic episodes. Living related donor livers are often considered for partial liver transplantation (LT) in individuals with a urea cycle disorder. The suitability of a heterozygous mother as a donor has been discussed [Wong 2012]. According to Wakiya et al [2012], enzyme activity measurement in a liver biopsy sample is useful in determining the suitability of a heterozygous mother as a donor. However, this approach is problematic for several reasons: A liver biopsy sample may not adequately represent the enzyme activity in the liver of a heterozygous female. It can thus not be known whether a transplanted lobe contains enough enzyme activity to prevent symptoms in the recipient. After partial hepatectomy the liver of the donor mother will regenerate. Since the X-chromosome inactivation pattern in the regenerated liver in the donor cannot be predicted, it is also impossible to predict whether the overall enzyme activity in the donor mother will remain adequate to prevent symptoms in her. Likewise, the lobe that is transplanted into the recipient child will undergo changes after transplantation; thus, the enzyme activity in the donated lobe cannot be accurately determined at the time of transplantation, since additional post-transplantation changes could make the final enzyme activity in the recipient even more unpredictable. Note: The efficacy of hepatocyte transfer for providing sufficient enzyme activity to bridge the time to liver transplantation in unstable individuals with neonatal-onset disease is currently under investigation (see Therapies Under Investigation). Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Instruction in small classroom settings to minimize distraction and extra support to manage executive function deficits are often required and necessary to maximize success in school. Monotherapy or combination therapy with non-stimulant or stimulant medication is often necessary for the treatment of ADHD (at least during times of learning) [Gyato et al 2004, Krivitzky et al 2009]. However, these medications negatively affect appetite and their use warrants even closer monitoring of intake and body weight to avoid a catabolic state that could lead to hyperammonemia. Seizure disorders. Valproic acid is contraindicated for treatment of seizures in urea cycle disorders because it can cause a hyperammonemic crisis. Learning disability/intellectual disability. Brain damage from an initial hyperammonemic coma, frequent hyperammonemic episodes with moderate to severe hyperammonemia, and chronic hyperammonemia can lead to learning disabilities and intellectual disability. Appropriate support services are necessary to optimize intellectual outcome in these individuals. Also see Urea Cycle Disorders Overview.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 In neonatal-onset OTC deficiency diagnosed prenatally, prospective intravenous (IV) treatment with ammonia scavengers within a few hours of birth (before the ammonia level rises) can prevent a hyperammonemic crisis and coma. Later on, prevention of hyperammonemic episodes is focused on restriction of dietary protein through low-protein diet and administration of oral nitrogen scavenging drugs balanced with supplementation of essential amino acids (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 The following are recommended: Avoid over-restriction of protein/amino acids, a common cause of hyperammonemia and poor growth. Gastrostomy tube feedings help avoid malnutrition in affected individuals who self-restrict protein intake and object to the taste of the essential amino acid formulas used for the treatment of urea cycle disorders. Minimize risk of respiratory and gastrointestinal illnesses through hand hygiene. Give immunizations on the usual schedule, including annual flu vaccine. Provide multivitamin and vitamin D supplementation. Use antipyretics appropriately. Note: Ibuprofen is preferred in the home setting over acetaminophen because of the potential liver toxicity of acetaminophen. See also Therapies Under Investigation regarding the use of hypothermia as neuroprotective therapy to prevent intellectual disability, a complication of hyperammonemia.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: At the start of therapy, measure plasma ammonia concentration at least every two weeks (or more often depending on the stability of the affected individual), then slowly extend to every month, every two months, every three months, and every four months, as possible. At the start of therapy, perform plasma amino acid (PAA) analysis at least every two weeks (or more often depending on the stability of the affected individual), then slowly extend to every month, every two months, every three months, and every four months. Perform liver function tests depending on symptoms every three to six months or more often if they have been previously elevated. Perform neuropsychological testing at the time that significant developmental milestones are expected to be achieved (e.g., at 6-9 months, 18 months, 3 years)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Valproate Haloperidol Fasting Stress, especially physical stress; potentially also psychological stress Systemic corticosteroids because they cause catabolism, which can trigger a hyperammonemic crisis Note: If systemic corticosteroids need to be administered as a life-saving therapy (e.g., during a severe asthma attack or an anaphylactic reaction), a metabolic specialist should be consulted; at the same time, preemptive measures (e.g., increased calorie intake) should be instituted to prevent catabolism.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives (both male and female) of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and/or preventive measures. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the OTC pathogenic variant in the family is known; If prenatal testing has not been performed, it is appropriate to perform biochemical (plasma amino acid analysis, ammonia level) and molecular genetic testing on at-risk newborns (males and females) as soon after birth as possible to clarify their disease status so that the appropriate treatment or surveillance of those with the family-specific pathogenic variant can be promptly established before the child experiences a metabolic crisis. Biochemical analysis (plasma amino acid analysis, ammonia level), an allopurinol challenge test (in older individuals), and/or OTC enzyme activity measurement in liver (males only) if the OTC pathogenic variant in the family is not known. In general for children with neonatal-onset disease, such testing cannot be performed rapidly enough to prevent a metabolic crisis. Therefore, preventive measures at birth should be instituted until such a time as the diagnosis can be ruled out (see the description of prospective treatment in Prevention of Primary Manifestations). See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Heterozygous females are at risk of becoming catabolic during pregnancy and (especially) post partum [Redonnet-Vernhet et al 2000, Mendez-Figueroa et al 2010, Celik et al 2011, Lipskind et al 2011, Ituk et al 2012]. A symptomatic heterozygous female needs to be treated throughout pregnancy according to her pre-pregnancy protocol with adaptation for her needs during pregnancy. In the peripartum and immediate postpartum periods proactive measures to prevent catabolism include, for example, administration of a 10% dextrose solution with appropriate electrolytes at 1.5 times maintenance and addition of intralipids as needed to meet caloric requirements during these periods. In an asymptomatic female known to be heterozygous, precautions should be taken in the peripartum and postpartum period to prevent catabolism; in addition, measurement of ammonia levels and administration of dextrose should be considered as heterozygous females have become symptomatic for the first time in the peripartum period.

Therapies Under Investigation

 The use of hypothermia for neuroprotection in hyperammonemia has long been proposed [Vaquero & Butterworth 2007]. Two case reports were published about its use in UCD [Whitelaw et al 2001, Vargha et al 2012]. Whole-body therapeutic hypothermia (TH) may decrease ammonia production through an overall slowing of metabolism. Decreased ammonia production was indicated in acute liver failure studies by lower arterial ammonia levels with cooling. The success of hemodialysis in lowering the ammonia level depends on whether the amount of ammonia removed by dialysis exceeds the amount of ammonia produced. If TH reduces ammonia production, dialysis will be more effective. In addition to its direct effect on ammonia metabolism TH may have a neuroprotective effect, at least in part due to reduced brain uptake of ammonia, reduced brain glutamine production, normal osmolyte levels, reduced intracranial pressure and cerebral blood flow, and improved cerebral perfusion [Jalan et al 1999, Jalan et al 2004]. Results of a pilot study assessing the feasibility and safety of whole-body therapeutic hypothermia during neonatal hyperammonemic coma have been published [ClinicalTrials.gov, Lichter-Konecki et al 2013]. While the study was not able to determine if the treatment was efficacious, the authors concluded that it was feasible and could be conducted safely. The efficacy of hepatocyte transfer for providing sufficient enzyme activity is under investigation (see ClinicalTrials.gov). In September 2009 a meeting in London assessed the ‘state of the art’ of hepatocyte transplantation and limits to its success; according to Puppi et al [2012] the participating experts agreed that, ‘to obtain sufficient levels of repopulation of the liver with donor cells in patients with metabolic liver disease, some form of liver preconditioning would likely be required to enhance the engraftment and/or proliferation of donor cells. It was reported that clinical protocols for preconditioning by hepatic irradiation, portal vein embolization, and surgical resection had been developed.’ Use of human induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells is under consideration. The principal concept is the use of an affected individual’s somatic cells to generate pluripotent stem cells that are then induced to become hepatocytes. Gene therapy could be performed on those hepatocytes in vitro, and the ‘corrected’ hepatocytes could then be used for liver regeneration in the same person without the need for immune suppression [Soto-Gutierrez et al 2011]. Current gene therapy approach. An adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector construct harboring the OTC cDNA has been developed; its efficient delivery to the liver of animal models has been accomplished [Wang et al 2010, Wang et al 2012a, Wang et al 2012b]. However, most recent efforts have focused on AAV-mediated gene correction using the CRISPR-Cas9 system [Yang et al 2016]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.