

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with complete plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended: Questions to elicit a patient’s history of: Epistaxis Poor wound healing Bleeding in association with injury or trauma Bleeding with dental extractions Additional oral bleeding Post-surgical bleeding In females: Heavy menstrual bleeding Postpartum bleeding Bleeding during pregnancy Preterm delivery Bleeding in association with ovulation History of therapies tried in the past and the response to each specific therapy Note that response to antifibrinolytic therapy supports the diagnosis of complete PAI-1 deficiency (see Treatment of Manifestations). Evaluation by a hematologist with training in hemostasis Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Bleeding disorder. Management by a team of experts in the treatment of individuals with bleeding disorders is highly recommended. In the US, such teams are often identified through the federally funded hemophilia treatment center network. Severe bleeding manifestations, including intracranial hemorrhage (with or without hematoma evacuation) have been successfully managed with intravenous antifibrinolytics. Response to both epsilon-aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid have been documented. If PAI-1 activity needs to be increased prior to achieving the therapeutic steady state level of antifibrinolytics, infusion of fresh-frozen plasma (FFP) (10-15 mL/kg) can be used. Duration of use of FFP is individualized based on clinical course and response to therapy. Note: The use of FFP does not appear to be effective in pregnancy for the prevention of bleeding in women with complete PAI-1 deficiency [Iwaki et al 2012]. Fresh-frozen plasma to replace PAI-1 during pregnancy may be difficult due to the PAI-1 level achieved with plasma, the volume required, and the need for repeated infusion, all of which may be associated with risk of volume overload and/or infusion reactions [Gupta et al 2014]. Heavy menstrual bleeding can often be effectively managed with antifibrinolytics or hormonal suppression therapy (oral contraceptives). Occasionally, patients with complete PAI-1 deficiency experience excessive menstrual bleeding or bleeding following a procedure or trauma that requires infusion of packed red blood cells to manage the acute blood loss. Education regarding bleeding manifestations and when to seek treatment includes the following: For females, anticipatory counseling regarding onset of menses and potential complications Prompt reporting of injuries and planned procedures to allow early initiation of treatment to prevent significant bleeding Cardiac fibrosis. There is currently no specific treatment for cardiac fibrosis associated with complete PAI-1 deficiency; treatment is symptomatic.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Antifibrinolytics should be used to prevent bleeding for surgical and dental procedures, childbirth, and other invasive procedures. Antifibrinolytics can be administered IV, PO, or topically, the latter especially during dental procedures. Women who have heavy menstrual bleeding often benefit from continuous or intermittent prophylactic use of the antifibrinolytics tranexamic acid and epsilon-aminocaproic acid.

Surveillance

 Bleeding disorder. Regular follow up with a team of experts in the treatment of individuals with bleeding disorders is recommended. Such teams are often identified through the federal hemophilia treatment center network in the US. For menstruating females: Regular monitoring: hemoglobin and/or hematocrit and iron studies including ferritin for possible iron deficiency and/or anemia Assessment of the effectiveness of therapeutic interventions such as antifibrinolytics or hormonal suppressive agents (oral contraceptives) Cardiac fibrosis. Because of clinical experience (albeit limited to date) with cardiac fibrosis in persons with complete PAI-1 deficiency [Flevaris et al 2017; Author, personal observation], screening echocardiogram can be considered beginning at age 15 years. In those with no cardiac findings, follow-up screening in two years is indicated; and in those with cardiac findings, follow up yearly or more frequently if indicated by a cardiologist [Ghosh et al 2010; Ghosh et al 2013; Author, personal observation].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 The following should be avoided: Medications that affect coagulation including aspirin, ibuprofen, and some herbal remedies High-risk activities such as contact sports

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an individual with complete PAI-1 deficiency in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the SERPINE1 pathogenic variants in the family are known; Measurement of PAI-1 antigen levels and PAI-1 activity if the SERPINE1 pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Recommendations based on published findings during pregnancies in two women with complete PAI-1 deficiency are administration of either tranexamic acid (25 mg kg-1 per dose, maximum 1300 milligrams, orally 3-4x/day) or epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA) (100 mg kg-1 per dose, maximum 3 g, orally 4x/day) for intermittent bleeding in the first and second trimester, from 26 weeks’ gestation through delivery, and for at least two weeks post partum [Heiman et al 2014]. Note that evidence that these recommendations would be effective in all pregnancies of women with complete PAI-1 deficiency is lacking. A woman with complete PAI-1 deficiency was treated with FFP during three pregnancies at eight to 11 weeks’ gestation two to three times per week; treatment was increased to daily at 20-28 weeks’ gestation. The first pregnancy ended in miscarriage at 19 weeks. The second and third pregnancies were delivered at 32 and 27 weeks’ gestation, respectively, as a result of uncontrollable contractions and placental abruption [Iwaki et al 2012]. Of note, the teratogenicity of EACA and tranexamic acid is unknown and information regarding their safety during pregnancy and lactation is limited. There is a need to establish dosing guidelines for the use of antifibrinolytics during pregnancy and the postpartum period. To access further information on medication use during pregnancy, see www.mothertobaby.org.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.