

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with hereditary pancreatitis, the following evaluations are recommended: Evaluation of pancreatic exocrine function (see Chronic Pancreatitis, Maldigestion) Evaluation of pancreatic endocrine function (i.e., assessment of glucose tolerance) Consideration of pancreatic cancer surveillance in persons with chronic pancreatitis

Treatment of Manifestations

 Medical treatment and management for hereditary pancreatitis are similar to those for non-hereditary pancreatitis.

Acute Pancreatitis

 Treatment of acute pancreatitis usually focuses on pain management and discontinuation of smoking and alcohol use to slow the rate of progression and to decrease the likelihood of complications, including pancreatic cancer. Pancreatic pain can result from pancreatic duct obstruction, parenchyma hypertension, pancreatic ischemia, inflammation, neuropathy, and central pain [Fasanella et al 2007, Mullady et al 2011]. Genetic factors, many of which remain unknown or not convincingly accountable, are thought to play a role in pain perception, tolerance, and response to medication. Analgesics are offered when pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy is not sufficient to control pain. Antioxidants have been reported to improve pain control in a few individuals with hereditary pancreatitis [Perrault 1994, Uomo et al 2001] and non-alcoholic chronic pancreatitis [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011]. Endoscopic or surgical interventions may be useful for treating obstructive pain [Clarke et al 2012]. Total pancreatectomy with islet autotransplantation is sometimes considered in patients with severe pain and/or inflammation that cannot be controlled by other approaches [Bellin et al 2011]. Endoscopic and surgical interventions are also useful for complications such as pseudocysts, bile-duct or duodenal obstruction, infected pancreatic necrosis, and malignancy. Obstructions or calcifications in the pancreatic ducts may be relieved by procedures such as endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), in which endoscopic cannulation of the common bile duct and pancreatic duct is followed by injection of radiographic dye. Decompressing/clearing of blockage decreases pain as well as the number of hospitalizations required and recurrent attacks in many persons with HP [Dever et al 2010]. Of note, patients with obstruction of a shorter duration have better outcomes than patients in whom treatment is delayed [Clarke et al 2012]. Note: Because of the risk for acute pancreatitis following ERCP, it is only recommended for obtaining brushings (for evaluation of strictures) and for therapeutic intervention, not for diagnosis. Although a variety of surgical approaches are used for non-cancerous pancreatic disorders that cause pain or obstruction from multiple strictures, pancreatic surgery in those with hereditary pancreatitis is unlikely to stop the underlying inflammatory process. Furthermore, pancreatic surgery often reduces the number of islet cells which are essential in pancreatic endocrine function [Sutton et al 2010, Kobayashi et al 2011]. Because total pancreatectomy with islet cell auto-transplantation (TPIAT) may be a future option for persons with HP, retaining as many islet cells as possible is an important consideration before proceeding with any pancreatic surgery [Sutton et al 2010, Bellin et al 2011]. Pancreatectomy. Although controversial, pancreatectomy has been performed as a last resort to improve the quality of life in those with uncontrolled pain, particularly young adults and children [Sutton et al 2010, Bellin et al 2014]. It is recommended that persons in whom pancreatectomy is being considered be referred to specialized centers. In persons with adequate endocrine pancreatic function, islet cell isolation and autotransplantation may be considered at the time of total pancreatectomy [Bellin et al 2008]. Note: Caution is needed for islet autotransplantation in older adults with longstanding chronic pancreatitis and diabetes mellitus because the number of islet cells is limited and because of the potential for transplanting malignant cells. Total pancreatectomy with islet auto-transplantation (TPIAT) is increasingly used to manage severe manifestations of pancreatitis; however, in most cases pancreatitis can be managed without TPIAT. Thus, TPIAT should only be used as a last resort [Bellin et al 2014]. See Bellin et al [2014] for consensus guidelines (full text). Issues to consider prior to referral for TPIAT: The operation is irreversible. Serious and life-threatening complications are associated with the operation (as with other major surgeries). Pain relief is not universal. Protection from diabetes mellitus is often incomplete and of variable duration. Life-long, full-dose pancreatic digestive enzyme replacement therapy will be necessary.

Chronic Pancreatitis

 Treatment of chronic pancreatitis focuses on improving quality of life by managing pancreatic pain, maldigestion, and diabetes mellitus. Pain is a variable complication of recurrent and chronic inflammation and ranges from minimal to severe and disabling. Pain can result from inflammation, ischemia, obstructed pancreatic ducts, pseudocysts, and/or maldigestion [Fasanella et al 2007]. One small study from Italy suggested that vitamins and antioxidants reduced pain in hereditary pancreatitis [Uomo et al 2001]; two larger studies found that antioxidants helped relieve pain in idiopathic pancreatitis [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011]. Pain from maldigestion can be improved with pancreatic digestive enzymes [Dhanasekaran & Toskes 2010, Whitcomb et al 2010, Burton et al 2011]. If the main pancreatic duct is obstructed, a trial of endoscopic treatment is often used for diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic reasons in determining longer-term therapy. Surgery has been reported to be helpful by many patients; however, surgical approaches should be postponed if islet autotransplantation is being considered. Pancreatic islet autotransplantation, available in several major centers expert in the treatment of pancreatitis, is used in an attempt to both control severe pain and delay the development of diabetes mellitus [Sutton et al 2010, Kobayashi et al 2011]. It is recommended that physicians and patients work closely with expert centers since pancreatic islet autotransplantation is irreversible. Maldigestion results from pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, which is the failure of the pancreas to produce enough digestive enzymes to digest a meal. Clinical measures of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency include observation of steatorrhea (fat and oil in the stool), symptoms of maldigestion (bloating, gas, cramps, and diarrhea), and nutritional deficiencies (e.g., fat-soluble vitamin deficiency and protein malnutrition with low albumin, prealbumin, or retinal binding protein). Pancreatic enzyme deficiency can be identified using invasive or noninvasive testing (see review by Lieb & Draganov [2008]). The first two are most commonly used by expert centers in the United States: Fecal elastase-1 analysis (ScheBo® Biotech AG; Giessen, Germany) is a simple and relatively inexpensive test that evaluates the amount of human elastase-1 present in the stool. It can be falsely positive with diarrhea, but can be used while an individual is taking pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy. The test is insensitive for mild pancreatic exocrine insufficiency [Amann et al 1996]. Secretin-stimulated pancreatic bicarbonate secretion testing (ChiRhoStim®, ChiRhoClin, Inc; Burtonsville, MD) requires intubation of the duodenum and careful measurement of pancreatic bicarbonate secretion over about an hour (depending on the method). It is considered very sensitive, but only assesses pancreatic duct function. Cholecystokinin (CCK) and its analogs (e.g., CCK-8) or receptor agonists (e.g., cerulean) have also been used to assess acinar cell function. 13C-mixed triglyceride breath test is of limited availability in the US. This test measures the ability of pancreatic lipase to digest a special substrate in the intestine after a test meal [Domínguez-Muñoz et al 2007]. 72-hour fecal fat is used to demonstrate that pancreatic digestive enzyme supplements are effective in digesting fat in the intestine of persons with severe pancreatic exocrine insufficiency. It is usually performed in a clinical research unit over four to five days during which time the patient eats a special high-fat meal (>100 grams of fat per day) and all stool samples are collected and analyzed. It is not used for diagnosis because of the complexity and inconvenience of the test. Sudan stain, which identifies fat in the stool, is not sensitive or specific for pancreatic insufficiency since undigested oils or fats can be present as a result of: Their nature (e.g., mineral oil, olestra), or Blocking of pancreatic lipase (e.g., orlistat), or Diseases of the intestinal mucosa. Diffusion-weighted MRI. Various “functional” tests have been advocated using abdominal imaging techniques, including secretin-stimulated MRI. Although diffusion-weighted MRI is probably better at detecting the structural changes of chronic pancreatitis than standard MRI [Akisik et al 2009], it does not measure function, and fluid volume cannot measure bicarbonate output. Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy improves digestion in those with pancreatic insufficiency who have pain with eating, steatorrhea (fat in the stool), and/or diarrhea [Perrault 1994, Whitcomb et al 2010, Burton et al 2011]. Pancreatic enzymes most effectively relieve symptoms in persons with steatorrhea and in a subset of persons without steatorrhea [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011]. The amount of pancreatic enzyme replacement necessary depends on the diet and on the amount of residual pancreatic function (which diminishes over time). The normal amount of lipase secreted is about 750,000-1,000,000 units (USP) per meal. (Note that earlier papers used IU, and 1 IU = 3 USP units [Pongprasobchai & DiMagno 2005].) Since a minimum of 10% of normal pancreatic enzyme output is needed to digest a meal, about 70,000-80,000 USP units of lipase are required for an average-sized adult (70 kg) with total pancreatic insufficiency. The amount can be reduced for smaller persons and those with residual pancreatic exocrine function – while monitoring symptoms and nutritional parameters. Diabetes mellitus is a common disorder and both type 1 and type 2 can occur in patients with pancreatitis by random chance. Type 3c diabetes mellitus is caused by loss of pancreatic tissue as a result of surgery, chronic pancreatitis, or other rare pancreatic diseases [Rossi et al 2004, Cui & Andersen 2011, Andersen et al 2013]. Type 3c diabetes mellitus is important because loss of both the insulin-producing beta cells and the glucagon-producing alpha cells results in loss of counter-regulatory hormones and risk for hypoglycemia. Furthermore, it appears to be associated with increased risk for pancreatic cancer, and use of some anti-diabetic agents (e.g., the incretins) may be of concern [Andersen et al 2013]. Chronic pancreatitis is associated with a gradual loss of islet cell function. The following may be of benefit [Cui & Andersen 2011]. Monitoring for glucose intolerance Optimizing pancreatic insulin secretion with pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy via amino acid and fatty acid-stimulated release of endogenous incretins from the foregut, with the addition of anti-diabetic agents as needed Synchronizing the entry of nutrients into the circulation with exogenous insulin therapy delivery through diet and promoting predictable early nutrient digestion and absorption with pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy Use of metformin as an oral anti-diabetic agent [Decensi et al 2010] Routine screening of patients with chronic pancreatitis for glucose intolerance; recommendations for management and referral have recently been published [Rickels et al 2013b]. See also Rickels et al [2013a] for new consensus guidelines on management of diabetes in pancreatitis (click here for full text).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 The ability to prevent the primary manifestations of hereditary pancreatitis (regardless of genetic cause) is limited. The following recommendations are for individuals with (or at risk for) hereditary pancreatitis; beginning in early childhood can help prevent attacks of acute pancreatitis: Low-fat diet. No formal guidelines for amount of dietary fat exist; however, some physicians recommend a low-fat diet to minimize pancreatic stimulation. If a low-fat diet is chosen, extra attention to providing fat soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K) is needed. Multiple small meals. No evidence-based guidelines exist; however, small meals may minimize pancreatic exocrine stimulation. Good hydration. Poor hydration (for example during exercise) can lead to episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished]. Antioxidants. One small study suggested that antioxidants may be useful in reducing the likelihood of acute pancreatitis in persons at risk for hereditary pancreatitis [Uomo et al 2001]. Anti-oxidant therapy is very low risk and low cost, and thus, an appropriate first course of action [Bhardwaj et al 2009, Burton et al 2011]. Cessation/abstinence from smoking and alcohol, the strongest recommendation for all persons with pancreatitis. Substantial evidence shows that oxidative stress from alcohol and tobacco smoke is inherently linked to progression and pain in pancreatitis [Schoenberg et al 1995, Petrov 2010, Tandon & Garg 2011]. This observation provides a pathophysiologic link for alcohol and tobacco smoking as risk factors, and also suggests that nutrition control may be an important preventive measure. Smoking is also a major risk for pancreatic cancer [Lowenfels et al 2001]. Note: Men with one high-risk CLDN2 variant and women with two high-risk CLDN2 variants should be strongly urged to stop drinking immediately and directed to effective treatment programs.

Circumstances to Avoid

 Alcohol and tobacco use exacerbate all pancreatitis regardless of cause [Lowenfels & Whitcomb 1997]. In combination, smoking and alcohol use increases the risk of developing pancreatitis eightfold [Yadav et al 2009]. Smoking doubles the risk for all forms of pancreatitis, including hereditary pancreatitis [Maisonneuve et al 2005, Yadav et al 2009]. Tobacco use is also linked with early onset of pancreatic cancer [Lowenfels et al 2001]. Dehydration worsens episodes of acute pancreatitis. Maintaining good hydration may be helpful in minimizing attacks, especially since nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite limit oral intake during an attack. Physical and emotional stresses aggravate pancreatitis [Applebaum et al 2000]. Avoiding these stressors in families with HP may prevent or delay worsening of symptoms and progression of disease. Yoga and other relaxation techniques may increase quality of life in persons with pancreatitis [Sareen et al 2007]. Some patients report that regular exercise, such as running, helps reduce the frequency of episodes of pancreatitis [Authors, unpublished].

Surveillance

 Surveillance for pancreatic cancer in high-risk groups with pancreatitis has been considered (see Definitions, Chronic pancreatitis for discussion of pancreatic cancer risk). However, because long-standing chronic pancreatitis results in pancreatic scarring and fibrosis that make assessment of abnormalities difficult [Ulrich 2001, Brand et al 2007], it is recommended that concerned individuals be referred to a surveillance program that includes biomarker research and other new techniques.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is recommended that relatives at risk for PRSS1-related hereditary pancreatitis be offered molecular genetic testing for the family-specific germline PRSS1 pathogenic variant (see Establishing the Diagnosis, Molecular Genetic Testing) to allow early diagnosis and prevention and/or management of symptoms [Applebaum et al 2000, Ellis et al 2001, Fink et al 2007]. Testing of children is appropriate in families with early onset symptoms. Presymptomatic testing is best performed in the context of genetic counseling [Fink et al 2007]. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Currently, chemopreventive agents such as calcium-channel blockers are being investigated for treatment of manifestations of hereditary pancreatitis [Morinville et al 2007]. Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.