

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with renal coloboma syndrome, the following are recommended: Evaluation of renal structure by renal ultrasound examination Measurement of renal function by serum electrolyte concentrations, BUN, and creatinine Urinalysis to evaluate for the presence of blood and protein Evaluation for vesicoureteral reflux, by voiding cytourethrogram (VCUG) if clinically indicated Dilated eye examination Audiologic assessment (See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for details of audiologic assessment.) Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 A team approach that includes specialists in ophthalmology, nephrology, medical genetics, and audiology is recommended. Management is focused on preventing complications of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and/or vision loss resulting from retinal detachment. Treatment of hypertension and/or vesicoureteral reflux (if present) may preserve renal function. ESRD is treated with renal replacement therapy (i.e., dialysis and/or renal transplantation). Low vision experts can assist with adaptive functioning of those with significant vision loss.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 For patients with known mutation of PAX2, regular monitoring of blood pressure, BUN/creatinine, electrolytes, and urine analysis and serum studies of renal function are indicated to allow for early diagnosis, as more than 90% of affected patients will develop ESRD.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Prevention of retinal detachment in those with congenital optic nerve abnormalities includes close follow up with an ophthalmologist and use of protective lenses.

Surveillance

 No disease-specific guidelines have been developed. The following ongoing evaluations are recommended in all individuals in whom pathogenic variants have been confirmed. Follow up by a nephrologist to monitor renal function and blood pressure Follow up by an ophthalmologist to monitor vision. Any change in vision could indicate a retinal detachment and should be treated as a medical emergency. Audiometric evaluation with periodic follow up

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Consultation with a specialist in nephrology before using medications known to impact renal function is appropriate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. If the PAX2 pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives. If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, dilated ophthalmologic examination and renal ultrasound examination, tests of renal function, urinalysis, and blood pressure evaluation should be performed. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

 It is important that a female who has a pathogenic variant have a thorough renal evaluation prior to becoming pregnant. Individuals with clinical renal disease should consult with appropriate professionals including nephrologists and maternal fetal medicine specialists to establish a plan for medical management during pregnancy. Pregnancies at 50% risk for renal coloboma syndrome should be monitored for fetal renal function. Comprehensive ultrasound in the second trimester is recommended to evaluate fetal renal anatomy. Ongoing monitoring for oligohydramnios in the second and third trimesters is recommended in at-risk pregnancies. Eighteen individuals with pathogenic variants have been reported to have prenatal ultrasound abnormalities including oligohydramnios/anhydramnios, cystic renal dysplasia, multicystic dysplastic kidneys, and renal hypoplasia [Bower et al 2012]. Seven fetuses with a confirmed PAX2 pathogenic variant and severe prenatal renal failure (Potter sequence) have been reported [Martinovic-Bouriel et al 2010, Bower et al 2012]. In addition, four cases of severe prenatal renal failure have been reported in families with renal coloboma syndrome in which the presence of the familial pathogenic variant could not be verified in the affected fetus [Ford et al 2001, Bower et al 2012]. In several instances, parents with mild renal disease had pregnancies where the fetus presented with severe renal disease in utero.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.