http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/paragangliomas

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a hereditary paraganglioma-pheochromocytoma (PGL/PCC) syndrome, the following are recommended: Imaging studies using MRI/CT, 123I-MIBG, and possibly PET to localize tumors and quantify the disease burden Evaluation of individuals with extra-adrenal sympathetic paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas for blood pressure elevations, tachycardia, and other signs and symptoms of catecholamine hypersecretion that must be controlled prior to definitive therapy Consideration of evaluation for gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) in children, adolescents, or young adults who have unexplained gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., abdominal pain, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, nausea, vomiting, difficulty swallowing) or who experience unexplained intestinal obstruction or anemia [Pasini et al 2008] Consideration of screening for renal cell carcinoma in individuals with SDHB pathogenic variants Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Clinical practice guidelines for the management of individuals with PGL/PCC have recently been published [Lenders et al 2014] (full text; registration or institutional access required). The management of tumors in individuals with hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes resembles management of sporadic tumors [Young 2011]; however, persons with hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes are more likely to have multiple tumors and multifocal and/or malignant disease than are those with sporadic tumors. For secretory tumors, treatment is directed toward containing the disease through antagonism of catecholamine excess with pharmacologic adrenergic blockade prior to surgical removal; treatment for malignant tumors is directed toward surgical removal and mitigation of the deleterious effects of metastatic spread [Eisenhofer et al 2004, Lenders et al 2005]. For nonsecretory skull base and neck paragangliomas, early detection allows for timely surgical resection and is believed to reduce operative morbidity and improve prognosis [Rinaldo et al 2004, Gujrathi & Donald 2005]. For carotid body and low vagal paragangliomas, surgical resection is the treatment of choice in almost all cases. Most are benign and can be completely excised. Note: In elderly individuals or those with clinically important comorbidities, surgery may be delayed and tumors monitored by serial imaging. Radiation therapy can also be considered in these patients [Gujrathi & Donald 2005]. For jugulotympanic paragangliomas, small tumors can usually be removed without difficulty; resection of larger tumors may be associated with CSF leak, meningitis, stroke, hearing loss, cranial nerve palsy, or even death. Therefore, close observation with symptomatically guided surgery may be prudent. Radiation therapy can also be considered, but potential long-term risks include malignant transformation of the primary tumor and other radiation-induced malignancies. In selected patients, stereotactic radiosurgery may also be performed [Gujrathi & Donald 2005]. For pheochromocytomas, surgery, preferably laparoscopic, is the treatment of choice [Lenders et al 2005, Young 2011]. Preoperative. The chronic and acute effects of catecholamine hypersecretion from adrenal chromaffin tumors must be reversed preoperatively. Combined α- and β- adrenergic blockade is required to control blood pressure and prevent intraoperative hypertensive crises. Using the following approach, only 7% of patients undergoing catecholamine-secreting tumor resection at the Mayo Clinic needed postoperative hemodynamic management [Young 2006, Young 2011]: Alpha-adrenergic blockade starting at least seven to ten days preoperatively to allow for normalization of blood pressure and volume expansion. The dose of the alpha blocker is adjusted for a low normal systolic blood pressure for age. A liberal sodium diet Once adequate α-adrenergic blockade is achieved, initiation of β-adrenergic blockade (e.g., 3 days prior to surgery). The dose of the β-adrenergic blocker is adjusted for a target heart rate of 80 beats per minute. Postoperative. Approximately one to two weeks after surgery, 24-hour urinary fractionated metanephrines and catecholamines and/or plasma fractionated metanephrines should be measured. If the levels are normal, resection of the biochemically active pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma should be considered complete. If the levels are increased, an unresected second tumor and/or occult metastases should be suspected. In individuals with SDHB pathogenic variants, paragangliomas or pheochromocytomas should be resected as soon as possible after tumor discovery. Prompt resection is particularly important for extra-adrenal sympathetic paragangliomas because of their tendency to metastasize.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Early detection through surveillance and removal of tumors may prevent or minimize complications related to mass effects, catecholamine hypersecretion, and malignant transformation.

Surveillance

Individuals known to have a hereditary PGL/PCC syndrome, individuals without clinical manifestations of a hereditary PGL/PCC syndrome but known to have a SDHA, SDHB,
SDHC, SDHD,
SDHAF2, or MAX pathogenic variant, and relatives at risk based on family history who have not undergone DNA-based testing need regular clinical monitoring by a physician or medical team with expertise in treatment of hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes. Screening should begin at age ten years or at least ten years before the earliest age at diagnosis in the family. Benn et al [2006] estimated that if lifelong screening were to begin at age ten years, disease would be detected in all persons with SDHD pathogenic variants and 96% of persons with SDHB pathogenic variants. Although no clear consensus has been developed regarding when, how, and how often biochemical studies and imaging should be done in at-risk individuals, it is reasonable to consider lifelong annual biochemical and clinical surveillance. The findings of these evaluations should guide imaging studies [Mannelli 2006, Pacak et al 2007, Lenders et al 2014]. Monitoring includes the following: Twenty-four hour urinary excretion of fractionated metanephrines and catecholamines, and/or plasma fractionated metanephrines to detect metastatic disease, tumor recurrence, or the development of additional tumors Follow-up imaging by MRI, CT, 123I-MIBG, or FDG-PET if the fractionated metanephrine and/or catecholamine levels become elevated, or if the original tumor had minimal or no catecholamine/fractionated metanephrine excess. In some individuals the image modality that was most effective in identifying the original tumor may prove to be equally effective in surveillance. Given the concern for cumulative radiation exposure in individuals who harbor germline pathogenic variants in genes associated with PGL/PCC, MRI may be the preferable imaging modality, with CT and nuclear imaging modalities reserved to further characterize tumors that are detected. In persons with SDHD and SDHC pathogenic variants, periodic (e.g., every 2 years) MRI or CT of the skull base and neck to detect paragangliomas and periodic (e.g., every 4 years) body MRI or CT and 123I-MIBG scintigraphy to detect paragangliomas or metastatic disease that may occur beyond the neck and skull base In persons with SDHB pathogenic variants, periodic (e.g., every 2 years) MRI or CT of the abdomen, thorax, and pelvis to detect paragangliomas and periodic (e.g., every 4 years) 123I-MIBG scintigraphy to detect paragangliomas or metastatic disease that may not be detected with MRI or CT In individuals (especially children, adolescents, or young adults) who have unexplained gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., abdominal pain, upper gastrointestinal bleeding, nausea, vomiting, difficulty swallowing) or who experience unexplained intestinal obstruction or anemia, consideration of evaluation for GISTs [Pasini et al 2008] Consideration of screening for renal cell carcinoma in individuals with an SDHB pathogenic variant

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Penetrance of hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes may be increased in those who live in high altitudes or are chronically exposed to hypoxic conditions [Pacheco-Ojeda et al 1988, Astrom et al 2003]. Avoidance of habitation at high altitudes and activities that promote long-term exposure to hypoxia should be considered. Activities such as cigarette smoking that predispose to chronic lung disease should be discouraged in persons who have a pathogenic variant in SDHA, SDHB,
SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF2, or MAX.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because early diagnosis and treatment is very likely to change the outcome for individuals (especially in the context of SDHB pathogenic variants, which portend aggressive disease), it is recommended that relatives at risk be offered genetic testing as early as possible when the family pathogenic variant is known. By age ten years or at least ten years before the earliest age at diagnosis in the family, presymptomatic testing, including genetic testing, should be offered to all first-degree relatives of an individual in whom a pathogenic variant in SDHA, SDHB,
SDHC, and SDHD, SDHAF2, or MAX has been detected. Use of molecular genetic testing for early identification of at-risk family members improves diagnostic certainty and reduces the need for costly screening procedures in those at-risk family members who have not inherited a pathogenic variant. Early detection of tumors can facilitate surgical removal, decrease related morbidity, and potentially result in removal prior to malignant transformation or metastasis [Young et al 2002]: In families with a previously identified pathogenic variant, relatives who do not have the family-specific pathogenic variant are spared the cost and anxiety associated with regular clinical, biochemical, and imaging studies. Family members who have the family-specific pathogenic variant can be informed of their heightened risks for paragangliomas and pheochromocytomas and encouraged to undergo biochemical and imaging studies as described in Surveillance. Note: Identification of the pathogenic variant (or the absence thereof) in an affected individual is essential for interpretation of negative molecular genetic test results in an at-risk asymptomatic relative. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

There are no published consensus management guidelines for the diagnosis and management of hereditary PGL/PCC during pregnancy. A high index of suspicion for these tumors in pregnant women is indicated, since there are other more common causes of hypertension during pregnancy (e.g., pre-eclampsia). Secretory PGLs/PCCs are more likely to present at any time during pregnancy (whereas pre-eclampsia is more common in the second or third trimester) and are typically not associated with weight gain, edema, proteinuria or thrombocytopenia. Individuals with PGLs/PCCs are more likely to present with palpitations, sweating pallor, orthostatic hypotension, and glucosuria, and the hypertension may be episodic. A 24-hour urine collection for fractionated metanephrines and catecholamines should be used as a first-line test, as there is little experience with the use of plasma fractionated metanephrines during pregnancy. MRI without gadolinium administration should be the first-line test used to localize the tumor, since CT will expose the fetus to radiation. Radioisotope imaging studies should be deferred until after pregnancy in non-lactating mothers for similar reasons. Surgery is the definitive treatment for these tumors, with appropriate alpha-adrenergic, and if needed, subsequent beta-adrenergic blockade to prevent a hypertensive crisis. Phenoxybenzamine is the alpha blocker of choice in both pregnant and non-pregnant individuals with catecholamine-secreting tumors [Reisch et al 2006]. For intra-abdominal PGL/PCC, a laparoscopic surgical approach is ideal if the tumor size allows. After 24 weeks gestation, surgery may need to be delayed until fetal maturity is reached (~34 weeks) because of problems with tumor accessibility. An open surgical approach combined with elective C-section may need to be performed in these situations. A good outcome has only been described with vaginal delivery in select cases [Junglee et al 2007].

Therapies Under Investigation

Attempts to inhibit or regulate the effects of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) activation, for example by enhancing prolyl hydroxylase activity, are being investigated and could provide the basis for useful therapy in the hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes [Lee et al 2005, Selak et al 2005]: One compound, R59949, enhances prolyl hydroxylase activity, preventing HIF1α accumulation in cell lines under both normal and hypoxic conditions [Temes et al 2005]. Other drugs that cause downregulation of HIF include mTOR inhibitors, HSP90 inhibitors, HDAC inhibitors, thioredoxin-1 inhibitors, and some microtubule inhibitors. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor inhibitors (e.g., SU11248 and BAY43-9006) could potentially be useful in treating hereditary PGL/PCC syndromes [Kaelin 2005]. Other substances currently under investigation include tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as pazopanib and sunitinib. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.