http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pbd

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with peroxisome biogenesis disorders, Zellweger syndrome spectrum (PBD, ZSS), evaluations of the following are recommended: Feeding Hearing Vision (comprehensive ophthalmologic assessment) Note: Electroretinogram (ERG) and visual field testing are useful in the diagnosis of retinal dystrophy. Liver function Neurologic function (possible MRI of the brain and EEG) Development Possible endocrine evaluation of adrenal function as adrenal insufficiency may occur during periods of stress

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment focuses on symptomatic therapy. Feeding and nutrition. Supplying adequate calorie intake for affected children often entails the placement of a gastrostomy tube to allow simpler home management. No specific metabolic diet is recommended. With many children having some degree of malabsorption, elemental formulas may be better tolerated. Hearing. Hearing aids should be used in children found to have hearing impairment. (See also Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview for discussion of management issues.) Vision. Cataract removal in early infancy to preserve vision is appropriate. Glasses should be used as needed to correct refractive errors. Liver. Supplementation of vitamin K and other fat-soluble vitamins is recommended. Liver dysfunction may lead to varices that respond to sclerosing therapies. Primary bile acid therapy may improve liver function by reducing the accumulation of cholestanoic acids [Setchell et al 1992]. Neurologic function. Early intervention services should be provided. Seizures are present in approximately one third of affected individuals. Standard antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) may be used. No type of AED is contraindicated. Seizures may be difficult to control despite use of appropriate medication.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No curative therapy is presently available for PBD, ZSS.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Longer-surviving affected individuals should be monitored for hyperoxaluria, which can lead to stone formation and renal failure.

Surveillance

Hearing should be evaluated annually. Annual ophthalmologic evaluation is indicated. (Although electroretinogram is useful in the diagnosis of a retinal dystrophy, it is not useful in follow up; visual field testing is much more helpful.) Coagulation factors and other synthetic liver functions should be monitored. Persons with overt hepatic dysfunction require more routine monitoring. The use of routine neuroimaging is uncertain. Individuals with peroxisomal disorders may develop a progressive leukodystrophy. No effective therapy exists, but identification of white matter changes may explain changes in cognitive and/or motor ability.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoidance of cow's milk and related products reduces exposure to phytanic acid.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

The use of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) has been suggested as a treatment for PBD, ZSS. This compound, which is important in brain and retinal function, is low in PBD, ZSS. Martinez [2001] and Noguer & Martinez [2010] have reported that DHA ethyl ester supplements restore DHA levels and improve liver function and visual function in some study participants, especially in those treated in the first six months of life. Paker et al [2010] performed a double-blind placebo-controlled trial in 48 children with PBD, ZSS who were supplemented daily with 100 mg/kg of DHA. Over a one-year period this study found no benefit from DHA supplementation in the two outcome measures used: growth and visual function. Although no clinical trial has been performed, anecdotal evidence suggests that all patients with PBD, ZSS who are treated with DHA benefit from primary bile acid supplementation [Setchell et al 1992]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

A diet low in phytanic acid has been proposed, based mainly on the weak analogy with adult Refsum disease, in which accumulation of phytanic acid is pathogenic and treatment involves restricted dietary intake of phytanic acid. Its effectiveness in PBD, ZSS has never been proven. All standard infant formulas are already low in phytanic acid.