http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pc-hypo-p

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with TSEN54-related pontocerebellar hypoplasia (PCH), neurologic evaluation, assessment of feeding and respiratory function, and clinical genetics consultation are recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations



PCH2. Recommendations are based on PCH2A caused by TSEN54 pathogenic variant c.919G>T (p.Ala307Ser). All other subtypes are very rare.

No specific therapy is available. Treatment is symptomatic. The main problems to manage:

Irritability, often related to chorea (involuntary movements), which is refractory to treatment

Swallowing problems due to bucco-pharyngeal incoordination, managed with nutritional support by gastrostomy

Central visual impairment

Epilepsy, which is amenable to standard treatments

Physiotherapy can be helpful.

Episodic or long-term institutional care may be needed to relieve the parents.

PCH4 and PCH5. No specific therapy is available.

Respiratory support is usually given for a limited time. Weaning from respiratory support may be possible for only short periods.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



During prolonged periods of high fever, electrolytes, creatine kinase concentration, hydration status, and urine production should be monitored and sufficient fluid should be given to prevent dehydration to avoid rhabdomyolysis.

Surveillance



In patients with PCH2 monitoring of respiratory function may be necessary to detect sleep apnea.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Although hyperthermic episodes have been documented in individuals with PCH2, no special risk appears to be associated with generalized anesthesia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Pregnancy of a fetus with PCH2 carries no special risk to the mother. No treatment for the condition is available. In the last trimester cerebellar development lags, which can be followed by measuring transverse cerebellar diameter. Birth is usually normal and uncomplicated; problems usually arise shortly after birth with irritability and impaired swallowing, often necessitating gavage feeding.

Pregnancy of a fetus with PCH4 may lead to polyhydramnios due to impaired fetal swallowing. Fetal akinesia often causes congenital contractures. Intrauterine clonus may be perceived by the mother through the uterine wall. Clonus persists after birth and is usually severe. Absence of respiratory movement necessitates mechanical support at birth.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.