

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with pyruvate carboxylase (PC) deficiency, the following are recommended: Blood, urine, and CSF measures of organic and amino acids; brain MRI and MRS analysis Evaluation by a pediatric neurologist skilled in metabolic and genetic disorders to confirm the diagnosis, guide the treatment, and determine the prognosis Genetic counseling for the parents regarding the risk of recurrence in future pregnancies Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment focuses on providing alternative energy sources, hydration, and correction of the metabolic acidosis during acute decompensation. Stimulating residual PC enzyme activity is an important goal for long-term stable metabolic status. Correction of the biochemical abnormality can reverse some symptoms, but central nervous system damage progresses regardless of treatment [DiMauro & De Vivo 1999]. “Anaplerotic therapy” is based on the concept that an energy deficit in these diseases could be improved by providing alternative substrate for both the citric acid cycle and the electron transport chain for enhanced ATP production [Roe & Mochel 2006]. Citrate supplementation reduces the acidosis and provides substrate for the citric acid cycle [Ahmad et al 1999]. Aspartic acid supplementation allows the urea cycle to proceed and reduces the plasma and urine ammonia concentrations but has little effect on the neurologic disturbances as the aspartate does not enter the brain freely [Ahmad et al 1999]. Lowering the body ammonia burden may mitigate the neurologic insult. Biotin supplementation is given to help optimize the residual PC enzyme activity but is usually of little use. Triheptanoin, an odd-carbon triglyceride, providing a source for acetyl-CoA and anaplerotic propionyl-CoA, has been tried in one individual with biotin-unresponsive PC deficiency type B with immediate reversal (<48 h) of major hepatic failure and full correction of all biochemical abnormalities [Mochel et al 2005]. Triheptanoin provides C5-ketone bodies that can cross the blood-brain barrier, therefore providing substrates for the brain. Dietary intervention with triheptanoin is the only therapeutic approach that showed improvement of brain metabolism. However, this observation needs to be confirmed in additional patients. Orthotopic liver transplantation has reversed the biochemical abnormalities in two patients [Nyhan et al 2002].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Educate parents about the factors that elicit a crisis and the early signs of decompensation. Carry an informational statement regarding the child's disorder and the appropriate treatment in an emergency setting. Minimize intercurrent infections as environmental stressors.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Individuals with PC deficiency are very brittle metabolically. Intensive medical support is indicated proactively to prevent dehydration, hypotension, hypoglycemia and increasing metabolic acidosis. Hospitalization is indicated for the management of fever, infection, dehydration or trauma. The ketogenic diet is an absolute contraindication, shown to worsen the acidosis into a life-threatening range.

Surveillance

 Monitor lactate levels regularly.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Fasting The ketogenic diet, which aggravates life-threatening metabolic acidosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnancy in a woman with PC deficiency has not been reported. However, women with the benign form (type C) could become pregnant; such a pregnancy should be closely monitored for any metabolic derangements including dehydration and acidosis.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Thiamine and lipoic acid could optimize PDHC activity, which could help reduce the plasma and urine pyruvate and lactate concentrations through an alternate route of pyruvate metabolism. Theoretically, this intervention could increase the acetyl-CoA pool and worsen the ketonemia. Thiamine was tried in an individual with PC deficiency who was found to be responsive. Two sisters with PC deficiency, severe intellectual disability and motor retardation, and Leigh syndrome improved clinically and biochemically after treatment with thiamine and lipoic acid. The precise molecular diagnosis in these cases is uncertain. Based on reports from the literature [Nyhan et al 2002, Mochel et al 2005], it has been suggested that a combination of orthotopic liver transplantation and anaplerotic diet be used in order to obtain both (i) long-term metabolic stability and (ii) improvement/correction of brain energy metabolism, myelination, and neurotransmission. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.