

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Perrault syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Clinical genetics consultation Endocrinology assessment in women: serum estrogen and gonadotropin (LH and FSH) concentrations. In women with relatively intact ovarian function, serum anti-müllerian hormone concentrations may provide evidence of incipient ovarian failure [De Vos et al 2010]. Pelvic imaging in women by ultrasound scan or magnetic resonance imaging to define the presence of ovaries and antral follicle count Audiologic assessment in men and women to define the degree and frequency range of hearing impairment by audiometry and physiologic tests (as summarized in Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview) Neurologic assessment to determine if ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, and/or learning disability is present

Treatment of Manifestations

 Hearing loss should be assessed and treated by a multidisciplinary team including an audiologist and otolaryngologist. Possible interventions include hearing aids, vibrotactile devices, and cochlear implantation. Cochlear implantation can be considered in children older than age 12 months with severe-to-profound hearing loss. Provision should be made for any special educational needs. Early intervention in young children with profound hearing loss improves cognitive and language development. Ovarian insufficiency. In adolescents presenting with primary amenorrhea, induction of puberty with incremental doses of estrogen should be undertaken in collaboration with a pediatric endocrinologist. In those in whom puberty is complete, cyclic estrogen and progesterone is administered to mimic the menstrual cycle and to trigger withdrawal bleeds. Estrogen can be administered orally or topically. Estrogen has a long-term protective effect on bone metabolism and reduces the risk for early-onset osteoporosis. Treatment should last until at least age 50 years to reduce risks of cardiovascular disease and osteoporosis, provided there are no contraindications to estrogen replacement. Assisted reproduction through in vitro fertilization using donor eggs is a consideration for women with Perrault syndrome. Before considering pregnancy, uterine size should be assessed. For women at risk for ovarian insufficiency, oocyte cryopreservation can be considered if ovarian function is sufficiently well preserved to allow for successful harvesting of oocytes.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 In consultation with a reproductive endocrinologist, estrogen replacement treatment should be combined with progesterone to reduce the risk for endometrial cancer.

Surveillance

 During induction of puberty, clinical assessment of pubertal staging and adjustment of estrogen dose takes place every three months. For adults on maintenance estrogen replacement therapy, assessment of withdrawal bleed pattern and overall well-being should be undertaken on an annual basis and assessment of bone density approximately every five years. Routine audiologic assessment is appropriate in individuals who have hearing impairment or are at risk for Perrault syndrome, as hearing loss is often progressive in nature. Audiologic surveillance is not required in individuals with profound hearing loss.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 For individuals with hearing loss: Avoid ototoxic medication such as aminoglycosides if alternatives are available. Avoid exposure to loud noise, which may contribute to deterioration in hearing.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from treatment and preventive measures (e.g., early intervention in young children with profound hearing loss, estrogen replacement to facilitate pubertal development, and potential oocyte cryopreservation if primary ovarian insufficiency is considered). See Treatment of Manifestations. If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, screening of siblings should be arranged to include audiologic assessment in males and females and baseline serum measurements of LH and FSH in females. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.