http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/perry

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Perry syndrome the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic evaluation of motor function Sleep study and evaluation by a pulmonologist or sleep disorders consultant for ventilation support if required Psychiatric evaluation and (if needed) neuropsychological examination Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Parkinsonism. Dopaminergic therapy (particularly carbidopa/levodopa) should be considered in all individuals with significant parkinsonism. Response to levodopa is usually absent, erratic, or transient in Perry syndrome [Tsuboi et al 2002, Wider & Wszolek 2008]. However, large doses of carbidopa/levodopa (>2g) have been used successfully to reduce rigidity, tremor, and other symptoms in two individuals, one from the new British kindred [Newsway et al 2010] and one from the original Canadian family [J Stoessl, personal communication]. Hypoventilation. Ventilation support (invasive or noninvasive) may prolong life expectancy and have a significant impact on quality of life. Several persons without evidence of daytime central hypoventilation or respiratory troubles died suddenly at night most likely as a result of nocturnal hypoventilation. Therefore, ventilation support may be needed only during sleep [Wider & Wszolek, personal observation]. A bilateral diaphragmatic pacemaker may help combat respiratory insufficiency [Pretelt et al 2014]. Depression. Psychiatric manifestations may require antidepressants and psychiatric follow up to help reduce risk of suicide. Weight loss. Careful weight follow up is indicated and high caloric intake should be considered if weight loss is present.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Adequate caloric intake must be ensured to prevent weight loss.

Surveillance

Routine evaluation of weight and calorie intake, respiratory function (particularly at night or during sleep), motor function, and mood/personality changes is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Use of central respiratory depressants (e.g., benzodiazepines, alcohol, narcotics) should be minimized.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.