http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/peters-plus

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Peters plus syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed: Complete ophthalmologic assessment including ocular ultrasonography for characterization of the eye anomaly and an assessment for associated ocular defects Growth hormone stimulation testing to address the possibility of a treatable cause of growth delay in those affected individuals in whom increased height would improve quality of life For neonates or infants, referral to an infant development program for appropriate developmental assessment Echocardiography for congenital heart malformations Abdominal ultrasound examination for renal anomalies Cranial imaging with head ultrasound examination or CT scan/MRI for hydrocephalus and/or structural brain abnormalities if neurologic symptoms are present Thyroid function testing in all infants who have not undergone newborn screening for congenital hypothyroidism Hearing assessment in a child with cleft palate or speech delay Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Eye. Potential preservation of vision in the affected eye(s) often requires surgery. For severe bilateral corneal opacification consideration of corneal transplantation (penetrating keratoplasty) is suggested before age three to six months to prevent amblyopia; in mild cases simple separation of iridocorneal adhesions may suffice [Traboulsi 2006]. A retrospective review of long-term outcome following penetrating keratoplasty before age 18 months in type I Peters' anomaly revealed a visual acuity of 20/400 or better in two thirds of treated persons, and no individuals with phthisis bulbi or visual acuity reduced to light perception only [Zaidman et al 2007]. However, a much poorer outcome with visual acuity in the better eye being ≤0.05 in half of the patients with Peters anomaly has been reported [Reichl et al 2017]. No results of similar studies in a large series of individuals with Peters plus syndrome are available. Management of amblyopia by a pediatric ophthalmologist is recommended for optimal visual outcome. Congenital glaucoma in association with Peters' anomaly is more difficult to treat than primary infantile glaucoma. Surgery and medical management result in adequate intraocular pressure in only 32%, and associated ophthalmologic issues such as amblyopia or postoperative complications contribute to poor visual results in long-term outcome studies [Yang et al 2004]. Development. Children diagnosed as neonates or infants should be referred to an infant development program for appropriate developmental interventions. Other. Additional management is symptomatic and expectant.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Assessment by a pediatric ophthalmologist every three months or as indicated to monitor for glaucoma and amblyopia Regular developmental assessments

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Agents that increase risk of glaucoma (e.g., corticosteroids) are to be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.