http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pf

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with
familial pulmonary fibrosis (FPF), the following evaluations are recommended:

Clinical history

Chest radiograph

High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan of the chest

Pulmonary function studies

Evaluation by a pulmonologist, preferably one with experience in IPF

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



The management of the individual with familial pulmonary fibrosis (FPF) is
similar to that for interstitial idiopathic pneumonia (IIP) and depends on the
type of IIP diagnosed for each individual within the family [American
Thoracic Society 2000, American Thoracic
Society & European Respiratory Society 2002].

Lung transplantation may be a consideration in selected individuals with FPF. In
general, those who are unresponsive to therapy, have significant functional
impairment, and have no other major illnesses that would preclude
transplantation are good candidates. Five-year survival rates post transplant in
IPF have been estimated at 50%-56% [Raghu et al 2011].

Non-pharmologic treatments:

Oxygen therapy may improve exercise tolerance in patients with
hypoxemia.

Pulmonary rehabilitation is a recommended option for patients who would
benefit.

Pharmacologic interventions have not generally been shown to alter the course of
IPF. Treatments have been categorized into classes such as corticosteroids,
immunosuppressive/cytotoxic agents, and antifibrotic agents. However, at least
two antifibrotic pharmacologic interventions recently approved may be an option
for patients with FPF to slow the decline of lung function. See Therapies Under
Investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



The following are recommended:

Prevention and prompt treatment of acute exacerbations

Treatment of coexisting comorbidities if appropriate including:

Pulmonary hypertension

Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)

Pulmonary embolism

Lung cancer

Coronary artery disease

Respiratory infections

Pneumothorax

Aspiration

Surveillance



The frequency of follow-up evaluations for persons with FPF depends largely on
the patient's individual diagnosis and status. Surveillance would follow the
guidelines for IPF [Raghu et
al 2011] or the specific type of IIP. Those who are stable may be
evaluated every three to six months, while others may need more frequent follow
up.

Pulmonary function studies including the following to serially monitor
disease course [Raghu
et al 2011]:

Forced vital capacity (FVC)

Diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO)

The six-minute walk test (6-MWT) distance and oxyhemoglobin
saturation change at baseline

Monitoring for progression of disease by HRCT of the chest

Oxygen saturation by resting pulse oximetry

Serologic monitoring for connective tissue disease (CTD) in patients
suspected of an underlying possibility for CTD-related ILD

Monitoring for any side effects known from pharmacologic treatments

Symptom control

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Cigarette smoking is a risk factor for developing idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
(IPF) and was shown to be an independent risk factor in families with FPF [Steele et al 2005].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as
possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic
testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, simple screening
tests have been found to be sensitive for establishing the diagnosis in
relatives at risk [Watters et al 1986, Hartley et al 1994] and
prognosis of pulmonary fibrosis [Watters et al 1986, Schwartz et al
1994a, Schwartz et al 1994b].

It is recommended that every five years, asymptomatic
first-degree relatives (of individuals with FPF) older than age
50 years undergo pulmonary function tests, obtain an HRCT scan
of the chest to detect early abnormalities, and complete a
standardized questionnaire to assess the presence of respiratory
symptoms.

Family members are considered to have a positive screening
evaluation (i.e., to possibly have pulmonary fibrosis) if they
have at least class 2 dyspnea (breathlessness when hurrying on a
level surface or walking up a slight hill), a DLCO
below 80% of predicted, or presence of at least ILO category 1
findings on chest x-ray [International Labour Office 2011]. Family members
who have a positive screen require further evaluation (see Diagnosis).

A study of asymptomatic at-risk family members in a FPF cohort by Kropski et al
[2015] identified more than 25% of subjects with subtle
radiologic and histopathologic abnormalities suggestive of possible
early interstitial lung disease. It is unknown if these findings would
become symptomatic FPF in the subjects.

See Genetic
Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for
genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Several therapies remain under investigation for the treatment of IPF. Agents
targeted to fibroblast proliferation, pulmonary hypertension, anti-inflammatory,
anticoagulation, and various chemokine and monoclonal antibodies among other
targets remain under investigation as potential treatments. Two antifibrotic
agents recently approved by the FDA for use in IPF as of October 2014 include
pirfenidone [King et al
2014] and nintedanib [Richeldi et al 2014]; the former has
been available in Japan and Europe for several years as a therapy for IPF.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information
on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.