http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pfcp

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with primary familial congenital polycythemia (PFCP), the following evaluations are recommended: Full blood counts with evaluation of white blood cells and of platelets, if not performed at the time of diagnosis Cardiology assessment including cardiac function (echocardiography) and blood pressure measurement. In case of increased blood pressure, perform 24-hour measurement. Recording of symptoms of hyperviscosity syndrome and their severity: Hyperviscosity syndrome symptoms: Headache Dizziness Altered mentation, sense of distance Visual disturbances Tinnitus Paraesthesia Low performance Fatigue, lassitude Myalgia, muscle weakness Hyperviscosity syndrome severity: Grade 1. Mild; does not interfere with normal activities Grade 2. Moderate; interferes with some activities Grade 3. Marked to severe; interferes with most or all activities Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 No management guidelines have been published. The majority of individuals with PFCP require no regular treatment. In some individuals with PFCP, antihypertensive treatment and phlebotomies are initiated either: When symptoms of the hyperviscosity syndrome are evident; OR At routine intervals to maintain the hematocrit at an almost normal level. While low-dose aspirin can be considered for the prevention of thromboembolic events, no evidence of efficacy exists. Of note, at least one individual (a male age 40 yrs) died from myocardial infarction despite regularly performed phlebotomies [Prchal & Sokol 1996]. Hyperviscosity symptoms (see
Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis) Grade 1. Consider aspirin treatment. Grade 2. Consider aspirin treatment. In the presence of persistent symptoms perform phlebotomy. In the event of recurrent episodes consider regular phlebotomy to maintain the hematocrit in the age-respective normal range. Grade 3. Consider regular phlebotomy to maintain hematocrit in the age-respective normal range. Consider additional aspirin treatment. 
            Thromboembolic events Provide acute treatment according to established practice for the event. Evaluate for other thrombophilic risk factors. Start regular phlebotomy to maintain hematocrit in the age-respective normal range. Consider additional aspirin treatment in all patients. Consider life-long anticoagulation (e.g., heparins, warfarin) when other severe additional risk factors are present or thromboembolic events have recurred.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Always maintain good hydration. Avoid activities that potentially increase blood viscosity (e.g., mountain climbing, scuba diving, smoking). For those at increased risk for thromboembolic events: take precautions in higher-risk situations such as long-distance airline flights.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Regular cardiology assessment including cardiac function (echocardiography) and blood pressure measurement. In case of occasionally increased blood pressure, perform 24-hour measurement. Regular life-long follow up with investigation of any suspicious clinical events such as thromboembolic complications and symptoms that could be related to hyperviscosity Regular life-long follow up to record manifestations of hyperviscosity syndrome and their severity (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid: Dehydration; Any activity that would potentially increase blood viscosity.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those with PFCP who would benefit from education regarding agents and circumstances to avoid and inappropriate treatments. Evaluations can include the following: If the EPOR pathogenic variant in the family is known. Molecular genetic testing If no pathogenic variant has been identified in the family. Blood count and serum EPO concentration if hemoglobin and hematocrit are increased See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 No information is available on the management of pregnancy in a woman with PFCP. Although the only survey of pregnancy in women with congenital erythrocytosis did not include any women with an EPOR pathogenic variant, data showed that when treated with low-dose aspirin and phlebotomy to reduce the hematocrit to a suitable level, women with erythrocytosis can have normal pregnancies and give birth to healthy children [McMullin et al 2015].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.