http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pfic

Management



Evaluations at Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of hepatobiliary disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ATP8B1 deficiency, the authors recommend the following: Standard biochemical assays of hepatocellular function and of hepatobiliary injury Imaging studies of the liver, with liver biopsy if indicated by the findings on imaging studies or biochemical assays Assessment for evidence of portal hypertension to weigh implications for surgical intervention

Treatment of Manifestations



Pharmacologic Therapy

Severe ATP8B1 deficiency. Although various medical therapies to alleviate symptoms and to stop or reverse the progression of liver damage have been tried, this disorder has, for the most part, been refractory to pharmacologic treatment. Standard treatments for pruritus associated with cholestasis (including choleretic agents such as phenobarbital and ursodeoxycholic acid [UDCA], cholestyramine, rifampin, antihistamines, carbamazepine, UV-B light therapy, and plasmapheresis) have been relatively ineffective in the long term. In addition, no data suggest that these therapies alter progression to end-stage liver disease. Mild ATP8B1 deficiency. Some medications, including rifampicin, UDCA, and bile acid binding resin [Folvik et al 2012, Mizuochi et al 2012, Uegaki et al 2008] may have some efficacy.

Nutritional Therapy and Supplementation


Severe ATP8B1 deficiency Special attention must be paid to nutritional therapy which includes infant formulas with significant proportions of medium chain triglycerides, which can be absorbed relatively independent of bile flow. Nasogastric tube feeding has been useful in some infants. Fat-soluble vitamin supplementation using special preparations of vitamin E (e.g., tocopheryl polyethylene glycol-1000 succinate) is useful in severe cholestasis. Individual supplementation may be required to insure adequate levels of fat-soluble vitamins.

Other Approaches

Mild ATP8B1 deficiency. Additional temporary approaches such as nasobiliary drainage [Stapelbroek et al 2006, Toros et al 2012] and extracorporeal liver support therapy [Huster et al 2001, Saich et al 2005, Walensi et al 2012] may hasten the end of an episode of cholestasis. Note: Because some of these studies involved individuals with a clinical – but not a molecular – diagnosis of BRIC, it is uncertain whether their disease was the result of pathogenic variants in ATP8B1 or in a different gene. Interruption of the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids. Since liver damage in severe ATP8B1 deficiency is thought to result from a build-up of bile acids in the liver, surgical interruption of the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids has been used as therapy. Such surgery can successfully reduce pruritus, with slowed or even reversed progression to hepatic fibrosis in some individuals [Felberbauer et al 2000, van Ooteghem et al 2002]. Surgical approaches reported to be successful in severe disease include [Hollands et al 1998, Ismail et al 1999, Rebhandl et al 1999, Melter et al 2000, Bustorff-Silva et al 2007, Clifton et al 2011]: Partial external biliary diversion (PEBD) in which the gallbladder apex is anastomosed to one end of a segment of bowel while the other end is used to create a cutaneous stoma from which bile is then drained and discarded*, interrupts the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids and reduces pruritus. In some individuals it even slows or reverses progression to hepatic fibrosis. *PEBD includes cutaneous cholecystostomy, cholecysto-jejuno-cutaneostomy, cholecysto-appendico-cutaneostomy. The internal biliary bypass approach of cholecystojejunocolic anastomosis. Alternative surgical procedures include ileal exclusion, external diversion with a button device, and biliary diversion to the colon. Note: Which surgical procedure is most helpful in severe ATP8B1 deficiency is unknown, although PEBD is the most commonly performed surgery. As most studies of responses to these procedures in individuals diagnosed with PFIC [Kaliciński et al 2003, Kurbegov et al 2003] have been performed in genetically uncharacterized patients, differences in response that may depend on which gene is mutated or on the severity of the functional effects of different pathogenic variants have not been assessed. Liver transplantation (LTX). Individuals with severe ATP8B1 deficiency whose liver disease progresses to decompensated cirrhosis, may require LTX for long-term survival. Individuals whose disease does not respond to surgical interruption of the enterohepatic circulation may also be candidates for LTX. In some individuals with severe ATP8B1 deficiency, LTX constitutes definitive therapy; however, in others secretory diarrhea in the absence of steatorrhea continues or worsens after LTX [Knisely 2004, Lykavieris et al 2003]. The diarrhea can be severe and may require intravenous fluid administration. Bile acid chelators [Egawa et al 2002] may ameliorate diarrhea after LTX, as they may divert bile produced by the allograft away from the native gut [Usui et al 2009, Nicastro et al 2012]. Clonidine has palliated diarrhea after LTX in some patients [Kocoshis et al 2005]. Somatic growth failure can occur and may not be responsive to LTX. Pancreatitis and steatohepatitis can occur after otherwise successful LTX [Egawa et al 2002, Lykavieris et al 2003, Miyagawa-Hayashino et al 2009, Davit-Spraul et al 2010, Hori et al 2011]. Steatohepatitis can be progressive and lead to cirrhosis. Both steatosis and diarrhea may respond when PEBD is used to divert the flow of bile from the allograft away from the native gut (which expresses functionally defective ATP8B1) [Usui et al 2009, Nicastro et al 2012]. Extrahepatic manifestations. Persons with sensorineural hearing loss may require hearing aids [Stapelbroek et al 2009, Pawlikowska et al 2010].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Severe ATP8B1 deficiency. Surgical interruption of the enterohepatic circulation should be the primary therapy in individuals with severe ATP8B1 deficiency unless cirrhosis is present, in which case LTX should be considered. Mild ATP8B1 deficiency. LTX appears difficult to justify in patients with mild, intermittently manifesting ATP8B1 deficiency. The role of surgical interruption of the enterohepatic circulation in mild ATP8B1 deficiency is unclear.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Fat-soluble vitamin supplementation is a key aspect of the management of the cholestasis seen in ATP8B1 deficiency. Vitamin supplementation is necessary to alleviate malabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins. Vitamin K administration in the newborn period is of critical importance. Medium chain triglyceride based formulas may be useful in the prevention and/or treatment of growth failure.

Surveillance

Periodic monitoring for fat-soluble vitamin deficiency is recommended. Hearing screening is recommended at five-year intervals in individuals with no symptomatic evidence of hearing deficits. Monitoring for hepatobiliary malignancy has not been shown to be necessary in ATP8B1 deficiency.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Susceptibility to sensorineural hearing loss in ATP8B1 deficiency may argue against use of aminoglycoside antibiotics or other potentially ototoxic agents.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Administration of 4-phenylbutyrate, a modifier of protein configuration, has improved expression/function of ATP8B1 in vitro [van der Velden et al 2010]. Extension to clinical use is under study [Gonzales & Jacquemin 2010]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.