http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ph1

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with primary hyperoxaluria type 1 (PH1), the following evaluations are recommended based on the guidelines and suggestions of Hoppe & Langman [2003], two recent reviews by the European Hyperoxaluria Consortium, OxalEurope [Cochat et al 2012] (see Table 4), and a recent review by Hoppe [2012]. The following are recommended in all cases: Molecular genetic testing to determine the AGXT genotype if not already performed Clinical genetics consultation The further extent of the initial evaluation of patients with PH1 should depend on their baseline renal function at the time of diagnosis and the evaluations performed as part of the diagnostic work up. For those with preserved renal function (i.e., measured or estimated GFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2): Renal ultrasound examination and fundoscopic eye examination to identify the presence/extent of oxalate deposition Baseline urinalysis (spot and 24 hour collection) For those with a GFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2. In addition to the above evaluations: measurement of plasma oxalate For those with a GFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2 or in whom there is a rapid deterioration in function. In addition to the above evaluations: Bone x-rays to evaluate for radiodense metaphyseal bands and diffuse demineralization, potentially bone marrow examination may also be required Thyroid function testing Electrocardiogram to evaluate for an associated atrioventricular block Ultrasound and/or CT scan of the heart and viscera allows evaluation of calcification in such organs Hemoglobin to evaluate for anemia associated with either renal dysfunction or marrow deposition of oxalate History and physical examination to assess the risk of arterial insufficiency or ischemia based on vessel wall deposition

Treatment of Manifestations



Reduction of Calcium Oxalate Supersaturation

 The general therapies for nephrolithiasis benefit all individuals with PH1. Early diagnosis and initiation of conservative therapy are critical in preserving adequate renal function for as long as possible [Fargue et al 2009]. The following recommendations are universally embraced, and those listed here can all be found in the following recent reviews [Cochat et al 2012, Hoppe 2012, Cochat & Rumsby 2013]. Drinking large volumes of fluid (2-3 L/m2/24 hours) at regular intervals over the entire day/night prevents calcium oxalate supersaturation and is effective for all genotypes. Note that small children may require gastrostomy or nasogastric tube insertion for both feeds and fluid supplementation. Extreme care should be taken during any illness that could lead to hypovolemia or decreased oral fluid intake; patients should be advised to seek early medical attention. Alkalinzation of urine (pH 6.2-6.8) to inhibit calcium oxalate crystallization can be targeted using oral potassium citrate at a dose of 0.1-0.15 mg/kg or 0.3-0.5 mmol/kg per day in 3-4 divided doses so long as the GFR is preserved. When the GFR is reduced or concerns about potassium levels ensue, alkalinization can be achieved with sodium citrate. Moderate doses of pyrophosphate-containing solutions may also inhibit crystal formation, and may be dosed as 20-30 mg/kg per day of phosphate. Drugs such as thiazides can decrease urinary calcium excretion and may inhibit stone formation, in particular in patients with PH3. Any significant intake of vitamin C or D is to be avoided as both may promote stone formation. Supplementation of dietary calcium (300 mg) or provision of supplemental calcium (300-500 mg) at each meal significantly has been shown to decrease urinary calcium oxalate without altering calcium excretion [Penniston & Nakada 2009]. While promising, this strategy remains unproven in individuals with PH1. Dietary restriction of oxalate as such is not supported as being an effective therapy for patients with PH1, although the principle of careful food choices (avoid high oxalate food and drink) would seem reasonable.

Treatment of Kidney Stones

 The stone type most prevalent in PH1 is calcium oxalate monohydrate or whewellite [Daudon et al 2008]. Patients must be counseled regarding the different success rates among the following three surgical modalities: Shockwave lithotripsy (SWL) is a viable first option, but only if patients are willing to accept a lower success rate and higher rate of subsequent endoscopic surgery. For larger, bulky stone burdens (>15 mm), percutaneous nephrolithotomy should be considered as first-line therapy. Ureteroscopy holds a very good record for success of stone clearance with minimal complication rates and may be supplanting SWL as first-line therapy at many centers. SWL. While SWL is often the first choice for treatment of kidney stones given its minimally invasive nature and requirement for only sedative anesthesia, its value has been questioned as the first-line treatment for stones in children with PH1 and PH2 as calcium oxalate monohydrate stones are among the hardest stones, and are thus more likely to be resistant to extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy (SWL) [Williams et al 2003]. A retrospective review of 36 individuals with PH who were treated with SWL between 1987 and 2009 in Birmingham, UK revealed that those who were treated with SWL required more subsequent treatments to render them stone free [Al-Abadi & Hulton 2013]. Whereas SWL was effective in 43%, repeat SWL was required in 61%. Stones in the lower pole of the kidney or parenchymal stones did not respond as well to SWL as stones in other locations. There is good evidence that any given stone(s) should not be treated with more than two SWL sessions, particularly if no change is observed with treatment [Pace et al 2000]. Ureteroscopy. Of note, in the endourology literature the trend is toward endoscopic treatment (ureteroscopy) over SWL for all stone types because of its higher success rate, but with the recognition of a potentially higher complication rate and longer hospital stay [Aboumarzouk et al 2012, Matlaga et al 2012]. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy and ureteroscopy. In the cohort of Al-Abadi & Hulton [2013], percutaneous nephrolithotomy or ureteroscopy both resulted in better stone-free rates and lower retreatment rates. While the two latter modalities are more effective at rendering the patient stone free, they have higher rates of potential complications than SWL. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy is still the best modality for large, bulky stone burdens.

Reduction of Oxalate Biosynthesis

 AGT is a pyridoxal phosphate (PLP)-dependent enzyme. Approximately 10%-30% of individuals with PH1 respond to treatment with pyridoxine (vitamin B6, precursor to PLP as defined by a greater than 30% reduction in plasma oxalate concentration or normalization of urinary oxalate excretion after a minimum of three months of maximal therapy [Watts et al 1985, Leumann & Hoppe 2001]. Of this group, only 40% show normalization and the other 60% a partial reduction in the concentration of plasma and urine oxalate [Toussaint 1998]. Monico et al [2005b] showed that the presence of the p.Gly170Arg pathogenic variant was associated with pyridoxine responsiveness — homozygotes showing normalization (urine oxalate concentration <0.5-0.7 mmol/1.73 m2/day) and compound heterozygotes demonstrating a partial reduction in plasma oxalate concentration by at least 30% of prior documented levels. The same result was seen in patients with at least one p.Phe152Ile pathogenic allele. At present, two different approaches are used to titrate the pyridoxine dose: A stepwise increase from initial low levels (1-2 mg/kg/day) [Bobrowski & Langman 2008] Initial high doses to maximize oxalate removal, with subsequent reduction to establish the minimal effective dose With either approach, doses of pyridoxine in the range of 5 mg/kg/day appear adequate in the treatment of those likely to respond, with no additional benefit expected at doses higher than 10 mg/kg/day [Monico et al 2005b, Bobrowski & Langman 2008, Hoppe et al 2009]. In adults, a dose of 500 mg is felt to remain below the toxic range. Paresthesias, a known complication of large doses of pyridoxine [Toussaint 1998], have only developed in one individual on a dose of 2.1 mg/kg/day and resolved following discontinuation of the drug. Pyridoxal phosphate levels may be followed in individuals to ensure that adequate absorption is occurring [Harambat et al 2011]. Individuals responsive to pyridoxine should continue this therapy to decrease the burden of oxalate on the kidney, even when on hemodialysis or following successful kidney transplantation. Note: It is recommended that all patients with PH1, even those diagnosed in ESRD and on dialysis, receive a minimum three-month trial of pyridoxine at the time of initial diagnosis [Milliner 2005].

Dialysis

 The issues related to the removal of oxalate and current modalities of dialysis are quite complex. Interested readers are directed to two papers outlining the specific details of extracorporeal removal of oxalate [Cochat et al 2012, Plumb et al 2013]. In brief, despite the small size of the oxalate molecule (90 daltons), the rate of oxalate production in persons with PH1-related ESRD (4-7 mmol/1.73 m2/day) vastly outstrips the ability to remove it via conventional dialysis in adults (1-2 mmol/1.73 m2/day) or children (3-4 mmol/1.73 m2/day). The sequestration of oxalate in tissue compartments outside the vascular space makes it difficult to effectively remove it from the body. Current guidelines suggest that the intent of dialysis is to reduce and maintain the plasma oxalate level as long as possible below 30-45 µmol/L (the calcium/oxalate supersaturation threshold at which tissue deposition occurs). While more aggressive strategies using high flux dialyzers, daily hemodialysis (HD), combined HD and peritoneal dialysis (PD), hemodialfiltration, and even charcoal perfusion have all been reported [reviewed in detail by Plumb et al 2013], the end result is that while plasma removal rates of oxalate can be achieved in the range of greater than 60%, the total body store of oxalate rebounds (in general) to a level of 80% of the predialysis levels within 24 hours of the last HD run. A case report of one patient treated with aggressive HD (8-10 hrs, 7 nights/wk) does suggest that this level of intense dialysis allows for maintenance of the pre-dialysis oxalate levels at or just below the tissue saturation point (30-45 µmol/L), but further studies are needed before these data can be confirmed [Plumb et al 2013]. Despite the limitations of dialysis, Cochat et al [2010] have suggested six situations in which dialysis may be indicated: When PH1 is not yet diagnosed in an individual requiring dialysis for other reasons In a small child/infant with oxalosis awaiting liver/kidney transplantation As a strategy to deplete body oxalate burden preceding or after liver transplantation As an adjunct therapy to decrease oxalate burden in the presence of delayed or poor renal function after liver/kidney transplantation In older individuals if liver/kidney transplantation is not deemed an option In countries with no access to organ transplantation [Cochat et al 2006]

Organ Transplantation

 As neither maintenance hemodialysis (HD), peritoneal dialysis (PD), nor a combination of the two clears oxalate quickly enough to prevent systemic oxalosis in an individual with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) lower than 25-30 mL/min/1.73 m2 [Thamilselvan & Khan 1998], organ transplantation is an acceptable option for disease therapy or perhaps cure [Marangella et al 2001]. Much discussion has occurred regarding the best transplantation strategy for an individual with PH1. The following recommendations and suggested approaches to this issue are all well summarized in three current reviews of PH1 [Cochat et al 2012, Hoppe 2012, Cochat & Rumsby 2013]. Specific percentages and outcome numbers can be extracted from these papers. The reader is strongly encouraged to review (and consider as current best practice level recommendations) the recently published suggestions on organ transplant of non-pyridoxine sensitive patients with PH1 from the European Hyperoxaluria Consortium [Cochat et al 2012]. These guidelines (see Table 7) also take into consideration the patient’s age (infantile form), residual GFR, and evidence of systemic oxalate deposition in extrarenal organs. Suggested Transplantation Options for Individuals with Pyridoxine-Resistant PH1 Based on Residual GFR and Systemic Involvement From Cochat et al [2012]; recommendations assume the availability of facilities. POx= plasma oxalate The three organ transplantation strategies that have been considered and implemented in the past are: Isolated kidney transplantation (restores oxalate excretion to "normal"); "Preemptive" liver transplantation before end-stage renal disease (restores AGT enzyme activity, decreases ongoing oxalate synthesis); or Combined liver-kidney transplantation, either concurrent or sequential (reduces oxalate synthesis and increases oxalate excretion). In almost all other situations, the current recommendations are for dual liver/kidney transplant in patients with PH1. In the majority of these situations, the only three issues to be considered are: Order of transplant (liver/kidney and sequential vs concurrent); Timing of transplant (at what level of renal dysfunction to consider liver transplant); and Use of deceased vs. living donors for either or both organs. Certainly the overall survival numbers for any version of dual transplant greatly outstrip those seen from historic results for isolated kidney transplant: adult five-year survival numbers for kidney vs dual transplant are 45% vs 67% [Bergstralh et al 2010]; those for children are 14% vs 76% [Harambat et al 2012]. Isolated liver transplant as such may be a consideration with respect to a patient with significant residual renal function (e.g., GFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2 or above), with the presumption that decline in renal function will be arrested and only a single organ transplant required. However, in such scenarios the concerns regarding risk of liver transplant morbidity and mortality in the face of an uncertain rate of decline in renal function often delay the decision to proceed to a point at which it is clear that dual transplantation will still be required. In general it is believed that simultaneous liver/kidney transplant is the most logical for any patient, adult or child, with CKD Category 4 or below, given the need for renal function to excrete the body burden of oxalate. That decision, however, may be mitigated by concerns for patients with CKD Category 5 or on dialysis, as they often face severe oxalate burden that can overwhelm a new renal graft following transplant and lead to graft failure caused by oxalate stones/deposition. The choice in such patients, and often in small children/infants where anatomy may preclude a simultaneous approach, is to proceed with a sequential liver transplant followed at an indeterminate time later by a single kidney transplant. Most of the published literature still reports the majority of organs used as being from deceased donors; however, living/living related donation of a split liver graft if the recipient is small enough and/or living donor kidney is certainly a viable alternative in some situations. Note: The appropriateness of using a parent or sib who is heterozygous for a AGXT pathogenic variant as a donor remains unclear in the literature. Finally, the importance of establishing the diagnosis of PH1 before transplantation is illustrated by two recent reports of individuals with undiagnosed late-onset PH1 who received isolated kidney transplants and subsequently experienced unexpected rapid recurrence of stones and systemic oxalosis. In both cases a diagnosis of PH1 was made post transplant [Kim et al 2005, Madiwale et al 2008]. It is also important to note that in all forms of transplantation, in particular isolated kidney, the individual must: Be monitored closely and even dialyzed following surgery to prevent further calcium oxalate deposition in the kidney graft from mobilization of the body burden of oxalate; Continue pyridoxine supplementation to promote excretion of the total body store of oxalate if responsiveness has been documented prior to transplantation [Marangella 1999].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Recommendations can all be found in Treatment of Manifestations, specifically in the sub-sections on Reduction of Calcium Oxalate Supersaturation and Reduction of Oxalate Biosynthesis.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Secondary complications may arise as a result of systemic oxalosis. Table 4 lists the broad range of tissues and organs that suffer consequences of oxalosis. Regular dental care and ophthalmologic follow up should be part of patient management.

Surveillance

 According to the European Hyperoxaluria Consortium (OxalEurope) [Cochat et al 2012] individuals with: Preserved renal function (i.e., measured or estimated GFR >60 mL/min/1.73 m2) likely require only the following to evaluate/ensure treatment efficacy: Regular renal ultrasound examinations and fundoscopic eye examinations to identify the extent of any oxalate deposition Ongoing urinalysis (spot and 24-hour collections) GFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2 should have the above evaluations as well as regular (not defined) measurements of plasma oxalate. GFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2 or a rapid deterioration in function should have the above evaluations as well as the following testing (performed prior to initiation of dialysis if possible, and repeated as needed): Bone x-rays to evaluate for radiodense metaphyseal bands and diffuse demineralization, potentially bone marrow examination may also be required Thyroid function testing Electrocardiogram to evaluate for an associated atrioventricular block Ultrasound and/or CT scan of the heart and viscera for evaluation of calcification in such organs Hemoglobin to evaluate for anemia associated with either renal dysfunction or marrow deposition of oxalate History and physical examination to assess the risk of arterial insufficiency or ischemia based on vessel wall deposition Further testing and surveillance of other organ involvement can be inferred from the list in Table 4 – noting that at GFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2 the ongoing deposition of tissue oxalate (oxalosis) will, of course, predispose all patients to multi-organ involvement, and this will worsen/accelerate as the patient enters ESRD/ initiates dialysis. Note: Investigations should likely occur more often in newly diagnosed symptomatic individuals or in children younger than age two to three years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Intravascular volume depletion. The importance of maintaining dilute urine cannot be overemphasized. Foods high in oxalate (chocolate, rhubarb, and starfruit in particular) Any significant intake of vitamin C or D, as both may promote stone formation Loop diuretics to maintain dilute urine, as they can lead to hypercalciuria and increase the production of calcium oxalate stones One infant with PH1 developed hepatitis after exposure to the anesthetic sevoflurane; this was felt to be an idiosyncratic reaction [Reich et al 2004]

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Consideration should be given to testing asymptomatic at-risk family members in order to plan early treatment, monitoring, and preventive intervention [Cochat et al 2012]. If the AGXT pathogenic variants in the family are known, the affected/carrier status of at-risk family members can be confirmed by molecular genetic testing. The benefits of early initiation of conservative measures cannot be ignored [Chand & Kaskel 2009, Fargue et al 2009, Martín et al 2011]. Asymptomatic individuals: Can be monitored periodically for renal function and urinary oxalate; Should maintain adequate hydration and avoid high-oxalate foods. In addition: Potassium citrate administration may also be considered as an aid to reducing calcium oxalate excretion [Leumann & Hoppe 2001]. For those with the pathogenic variant p.Gly170Arg or p.Phe152Ile, pyridoxine should be supplemented. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnancy does not appear to be an important risk factor for the development of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in the majority of women with PH1 [Norby & Milliner 2004]; however, women in whom renal function deteriorated during the pregnancy and remained abnormal post-delivery have been reported [Cimino et al 2005]. Of particular note, pregnant women with PH1 warrant close monitoring during pregnancy by both an obstetrician and nephrologist because of the increased risk of developing nephrolithiasis after delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Several novel therapies are under investigation. Oxalate-degrading bacteria. Approaches involving oral administration of bacteria such as Oxalobacter formigenes (O. formigenes) or lactic acid bacteria to degrade oxalate [Sidhu et al 2001] and reduce the amount of oxalate available for intestinal absorption [Campieri et al 2001, Lieske et al 2005a, Azcarate-Peril et al 2006] are being investigated. Unfortunately this bacteria currently remains off the Qualified Presumption of Safety and Generally Recognized as Safe lists as maintained by the FDA, limiting the use in humans. O. formigenes shows the most promise as a potential therapy for the hyperoxalurias. Although it is a normal component of the intestinal flora, many individuals do not maintain colonization. O. formigenes is also thought to stimulate secretion of endogenous oxalate into the intestine for its own metabolic use [Hatch et al 2006, Hatch & Freel 2008]. A human strain of O. formigenes (HC-1) has been shown to promote oxalate secretion into the intestine of a mouse model of primary hyperoxaluria [Hatch & Freel 2013] in which there was more secretion of oxalate via the distal ileum, cecum, and distal colon into the luminal side and, thus, into the feces. Administration of the HC-1 strain reduced the amount of oxalate excreted via the kidney and has potential as a probiotic. A controlled diet was compared to two probiotic preparations to evaluate urinary oxalate levels and calcium oxalate supersaturation in individuals with hyperoxaluria and calcium oxalate stones of unknown etiology [Lieske et al 2010]: (1) the probiotic Oxadrop contains Lactobacillus acidophilus, L. brevis, Streptococcus thermophilus, and Bifidobacterium infantis; (2) AKSB, a formulation designed by the Mayo Clinic, contains Enterococcus faecium, Saccharomyces cerevisiae subspecies boulardi, LEVUCELL SB (yeast), S. cerevisiae, and fructooligosaccharide. When administered to stone formers, neither formulation reduced the amount of urinary oxalate excreted by affected individuals or the urinary calcium-oxalate supersaturation levels. However, an oxalate-restricted diet alone for one week significantly reduced the calcium oxalate supersaturation and the urinary levels of oxalate. A probiotic, VSL#3 (Sigma-Tau Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD, USA), which contains freeze-dried live lactic acid bacteria made up of Streptococcus thermophilus, Bifidobacterium breve, B. longum, B. infantis, Lactobactillus acidophlus, L. plantarum, L. paracasei, and L. delbrueckii subspecies bulgaricus was administered to 13 healthy volunteers who were then challenged to an oral load of 80 mg oxalate [Okombo & Liebman 2010]. Four of the subjects who started with higher baseline oxalate levels showed the largest reduction in urinary oxalate levels compared to the other subjects. The authors suggest that individuals who are hyperabsorbers of oxalate may benefit most from the probiotic VSL#3. This study must be validated in individuals with PH1. Similar studies have been performed in mice genetically altered to mimic PH1. AGXT-deficient mice were both hyperoxaluric and hyperoxalemic [Hatch et al 2011]. In AGXT-deficient mice colonized with O. formigenes, urinary and plasma levels of oxalate decreased by 50%. Advances have been made to circumvent the colonization of O. formigenes by expressing bacterial oxalyl-CoA decarboxylase and formyl-CoA transferase in human embryo kidney (HEK) 293 cells [Ye et al 2007]. Further experiments have shown that the enzymes are expressed in the cytosol of cells and transfected cells were able to degrade oxalate to some degree. Although still in the experimental stages, the transfer of genes encoding oxalate-degrading enzymes may be a potential candidate for gene therapy of hyperoxalurias. Other bacterial species.
Giardina et al [2014] looked at a number of other bacteria with potential for oxalate degradation in the gut. These in vitro studies demonstrated (in addition to O. formigenes) four probiotic strains which appeared promising: Lactobacillus plantarum, L. acidophilus, Bifidobacgerium breve, and B. longum. Finally, in a different approach, a crystalline-stabilized oxalate-degrading enzyme has been used successfully in a mouse model system and may avoid the colonization issue [Grujic et al 2009]. Hepatocyte transplantation. Repopulation of the liver of an individual with PH1 with normal or genetically corrected hepatocytes is less invasive than liver transplantation. However, host cells must be ablated as they would continue to produce oxalate and the donor hepatocytes would then require a growth advantage to achieve repopulation. The effectiveness of this approach has been demonstrated in a mouse model of PH1 [Guha et al 2005, Jiang et al 2008]. Koul et al [2005] transfected AGXT (genetically engineered for selective peroxisomal delivery) into cultured human hepatocytes by amplifying the cDNA and using liposomal transfection techniques. They demonstrated high efficiency of transfection and appropriate intracellular localization to peroxisomes [Koul et al 2005]. Recently, liver cell transplantation was performed ‘successfully’ in a 15-month old girl with PH1 as a bridge to an older age/larger size to allow for orthotopic liver transplant [Beck et al 2012]. The exact protocol is outlined in the paper; the child tolerated both the cellular infusions and the immunosuppression. Initially no significant change was seen in plasma oxalate levels post infusion; however, the plasma oxalate levels slowly decreased over the next two weeks from a mean of 105 to a lower mean of 70, and eventually fell to approximately 35 µmol/L at day 29. Long-term follow up (2-11 months) demonstrated persistently elevated (mean 80 µmol/L) – albeit improved over baseline – levels of plasma oxalate. Of note, clinically the patient improved from week two onward, despite the fact that donor chimerism was not demonstrated during the protocol biopsy at five months or at the time of liver harvest prior to the eventual orthotopic liver transplant. Gene therapy.
Salido et al [2011] have demonstrated successful replacement of AGT enzyme activity in the livers of a knockout mouse model of PH1 utilizing a somatic gene transfer via two adeno-associated viral vectors. That they were able to do so in the absence of either hepatic toxicity or immunogenicity for at least the first 50 days is very encouraging. Pyridoxamine. This approach aims to reduce oxalate by targeting precursors in the metabolic pathway and preventing their eventual metabolism to oxalate. Pyridoxamine, a drug touted as therapy for human diabetic nephropathy, is used to trap glycoaldehyde and glyoxylate. Animal studies have shown 50% reduction of urinary oxalate excretion [Chetyrkin et al 2005, Scheinman et al 2005]; current evidence from preclinical and phase II trials in humans appears to demonstrate a favorable toxicity profile of pyridoxamine. Chemical chaperones. These small molecules facilitate folding of new proteins offering protection from cellular quality-control degradative processes. Stabilization of missense AGT may permit the protein to achieve a folded state with some degree of enzymatic activity [Danpure 2005a, Danpure 2005b]. In PH1 specifically, this type of effect has been demonstrated in vitro for both mistargeting and aggregation/accelerated degradation polymorphism-pathogenic variant combinations [Lumb et al 2003, Coulter-Mackie & Lian 2008, Hopper et al 2008]. Chemical chaperones may have general stabilizing functions or they may be designed to target specific pathogenic variants. Pyridoxine, commonly used in treatment of PH1, has been shown in vitro to act as a chemical chaperone increasing expression and correcting peroxisomal targeting, particularly for the three common AGXT alleles encoding protein variants p.Gly170Arg, p.Phe152Ile,or p.Ile244Thr [Fargue et al 2013a, Fargue et al 2013b, Cellini et al 2014]. Pathogenic missense variants – in which the mode of action is not through loss of stability – are not suitable candidates for this pharmacogenetic approach; nor are insertions, deletions, nonsense variants, or splice junction changes, which usually do not produce a protein product. Manipulation of the metabolic pathway. The concept of substrate depletion is aimed at reducing the amount of available glyoxylate, the immediate precursor of oxalate, thereby reducing the oxalate concentration [Coulter-Mackie 2006]. An Agxt knockout mouse model has been developed to explore the effects of substrate depletion and to clarify the various adjustments in the metabolic pathway that result from absence of AGT [Hernández-Fernaud & Salido 2010, Knight et al 2012]. A model system developed in CHO cells uses stable transfection with all combinations of recombinant genes that encode glycolate oxidase, glyoxylate reductase, and AGT, allowing investigation of the interaction of these enzymes and the effects of deficiencies of one or more [Behnam et al 2006]. Another study examined the effect on urinary oxalate of dietary hydroxyproline from collagen, which enters the pathway farther upstream. Results suggested that hydroxyproline metabolism may be a significant contributor to glyoxylate and oxalate [Knight et al 2006]. A study of eight recombinant cytosolic aminotransferases suggested that phosphoserine aminotransferase and alanine transaminase were able to transaminate glyoxylate to glycine efficiently. These reactions may compete with conversion of glyoxylate to oxalate [Donini et al 2009]. Severe dietary restriction of either oxalate [Hatch & Freel 1995] or glycine, a glyoxylate precursor, is of little utility in decreasing the accumulation of oxalate in individuals with PH1 [Danpure 2001]. Trapping glycine in the liver utilizing benzoate or inhibiting the conversion of glycine to glyoxylate is of little or no clinical utility [Danpure 2001]. Auxiliary liver transplant. A previously heretical approach to organ transplant, auxiliary liver transplant has been proposed and demonstrated to ‘be effective’ in two published cases [Onaca et al 2005, Elias et al 2013] and to potentially provide effective oxalate clearance for some patients with PH1. This approach is not universally accepted as such, however [Trotter & Milliner 2014], and the basic principle behind the need to remove the native liver in addition to ‘replacing liver mass with a transplanted organ’ (namely the ongoing and overwhelming production of oxalate from the abnormal liver cells) would seem to suggest that the addition of a small piece of normal liver and its normal AGT enzymatic function would not be enough to provide sufficient metabolic clearance of oxalate being produced by the remaining PH1 liver tissue. Onaca et al [2005] and Elias et al [2013] have each reported at least one patient with PH1 in whom this approach appeared to protect against oxalosis – without necessitating a high-risk full liver transplant. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.