http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ph2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with primary hyperoxaluria type 2 (PH2), the following evaluations are recommended [Leumann & Hoppe 2001]: Assessment of renal function If moderate to advanced ESRD is present, assessment of systemic oxalate deposition in tissue and bone: Bone x-rays to look for radiodense metaphyseal bands Ophthalmic examination of the retina to look for oxalate crystals Evaluation of cardiac function by echocardiography

Treatment of Manifestations

 Reduction of calcium oxalate supersaturation. As with PH1, conservative therapy is applied with the aim of minimizing oxalate-related renal injury and preserving renal function. Treatment of persons with preserved renal function, reviewed by Leumann & Hoppe [2001], essentially aims to improve oxalate solubility as follows: Adequate fluid intake (>2.5 L/m2 surface area/day) Urinary inhibitors of calcium oxalate crystallization: Orthophosphate treatment (20-60 mg/kg body weight/day) [Leumann & Hoppe 2001] (20-60 mg/kg body weight/day) Potassium citrate (0.1-0.15 g/kg body weight/day) [Leumann & Hoppe 2001] Magnesium supplements (200-300 mg/day in divided doses) [Watts 1994] Dialysis. Because the plasma oxalate concentration begins to rise when the renal clearance is less than 40 mL/min/1.73 m2, early initiation of dialysis or preemptive kidney-only transplantation is preferred. For patients in ESRD, intensive (daily) dialysis is required to maximize oxalate removal. As in PH1, the longer the individual with PH2 is on dialysis the more likely systemic oxalate deposition will occur. Organ transplantation. Kidney transplantation alone has been used in PH2 with varying success. Careful management in the postoperative period, with attention to brisk urine output and use of calcium oxalate urinary inhibitors, minimizes the risk of allograft loss as a result of oxalate deposition. To date, liver-kidney transplantation has not been used in PH2; however, as there is more enzyme present in the liver than in other tissues [Cregeen et al 2003], this strategy may have some merit. Other. Pharmacologic doses of pyridoxine are used as a treatment in PH1 because of its role as cofactor for the defective enzyme. Its role in PH2 is unproven, but doses in the range of that found in typical multivitamin tablets have been used in an attempt to boost transaminases (including alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase) with glyoxylate metabolizing activity.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 The main preventative treatment is to maintain adequate hydration status and to enhance calcium oxalate solubility with exogenous citrate and neutral phosphates as described in Treatment of Manifestations.

Surveillance

 Frequency of testing depends on the center; however, as a guide, the following are recommended: Quarterly. Assessment of renal function, blood pressure, and hematocrit Six monthly to annually. Renal imaging (ultrasound or CT examination) to assess renal stone burden* Annually. Examination for involvement of the skin, bone, eye, or thyroid* For pregnant women with PH2, close monitoring by both an obstetrician and nephrologist because of the increased risk of developing nephrolithiasis during pregnancy or after delivery *Investigations should likely occur more often in newly diagnosed symptomatic individuals or in children younger than age two to three years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 The following should be avoided: Dehydration Excessive ascorbate (i.e., vitamin C; >1000 mg/day) Foods rich in oxalate (chocolate, rhubarb, spinach, and starfruit in particular)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 In order to delay disease onset in asymptomatic relatives, it is prudent to screen at-risk family members before symptoms occur by measuring urinary oxalate excretion or by molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known. Molecular genetic testing tends to be more reliable as urine oxalate output can be variable in childhood. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Treatment with Oxalobacter formigenes is currently undergoing clinical trials in patients with hyperoxaluria and may provide an additional form of treatment for PH1 and PH2 [Hoppe et al 2006] by inducing oxalate excretion into the gut [Hatch & Freel 2003]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.