http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ph3

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with primary hyperoxaluria type 3 (PH3), the following evaluations are recommended:

Kidney imaging for assessment of number and location of stones and presence of nephrocalcinosis

Measurement of plasma oxalate concentration to assess the degree of oxalate overproduction

Baseline 24-hour collection with measurement of oxalate, calcium, citrate, pH, urine volume, and other components of a supersaturation profile to identify specific risk factors for stones – information that is valuable in guiding treatment

Assessment of kidney function by serum creatinine and eGFR

If chronic kidney disease (CKD) is present, evaluation for signs of systemic oxalosis by physical examination (livedo reticularis or non-healing ulcers of the skin), echocardiography (oxalate cardiomyopathy), electrocardiogram (conduction disturbances), complete blood count (erythropoietin-resistant anemia), bone films (sclerosis, pathologic fractures due to oxalate osteodystrophy), and retinal examination (retinal oxalate deposits)

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Reduction of urine supersaturation of calcium oxalate in order to reduce stone formation and formation of calcium oxalate crystals that can be injurious to the kidney:

Maintainance of high oral fluid intake (>2.5 L/m2 BSA)

Oral administration of an inhibitor of calcium oxalate crystallization. Most patients are treated with one of these agents, which include potassium and sodium citrate [Leumann & Hoppe 2001], orthophosphate [Milliner et al 1994], or magnesium [Watts 1994]. Note: Simultaneous administration of citrate and phosphate should be done with caution due to the potential for increasing calcium phosphate supersaturation.

Avoidance of supersaturation of calcium oxalate in the blood. Although there is little experience with chronic kidney disease in PH3, a decline in GFR to less than approximately 40 mL/min/1.73m2 would be expected to result in increased plasma oxalate and the potential for systemic oxalosis (as in other forms of PH). If plasma oxalate exceeds 35-50 μmol/L dialysis or transplantation is needed to reduce the risk of multiorgan complications of calcium oxalate deposition.

Prevention of stone complications through regular monitoring (see Surveillance) and prompt attention to the following, any of which can damage kidney function:

Alleviate obstruction of the urinary tract by a stone promptly through stent placement and/or stone removal.

Maintain continuous fluid intake and urine flow before, during, and for several days after stone removal procedures.

Treat urinary tract infections promptly and thoroughly, as bacteria may cause pyelonephritis or infect stones and complicate management.

Avoidance of acute kidney injury by avoiding intravascular volume contraction at all times. This may necessitate intravenous fluids during severe gastroenteritis or other circumstances in which oral fluid intake cannot be maintained.

Avoidance of marked dietary oxalate excess. Since the source of the excess oxalate in PH3 is metabolic overproduction, little is gained by strict low oxalate diets, which in young children may compromise nutrition. Simple avoidance of marked dietary oxalate excess is recommended.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



See Treatment of Manifestations.

Surveillance



Attention to ongoing care, including adherence to high fluid intake and medication schedule, is essential to good outcomes.

For patients who are stable and doing well* the following are recommended annually:

Clinical assessment of stone-related symptoms including pain, frequency of passage of stones or gravel in the urine, and urinary tract infection

Assessment of kidney function (serum creatinine and eGFR) and electrolytes

Measurement of plasma oxalate concentration, particularly in those with any impairment of glomerular filtration rate (GFR)

24 hour urine oxalate and supersaturation study. During follow up, changes in the urine supersaturation can be used to monitor the effectiveness of therapy by confirming that the crystallization potential has decreased.

Renal ultrasound examination or other imaging to monitor for stone formation

*Very young patients, those with complex stone problems, and those with reduced kidney function need closer management with more frequent assessments.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



The following should be avoided:

Intravascular volume contraction (Note: Liberal use of intravenous fluids is indicated whenever oral fluid intake is inadequate.)

Delays in treatment of acute stone episodes

Nephrotoxic agents

Marked dietary oxalate excess

High-dose ascorbic acid

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Using molecular genetic testing for the HOGA1 pathogenic variants found in the proband, it is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early treatment and preventive measures.

Urine oxalate should be measured in all sibs who are affected (i.e., have biallelic HOGA1 pathogenic variants) or who are carriers (i.e., heterozygous for one HOGA1 pathogenic variant)

Any sib with elevated urine oxalate/creatinine ratio or elevated oxalate excretion rate corrected for 1.73 m2 BSA should undergo kidney ultrasound examination, measurement of plasma oxalate concentration, a baseline 24-hour urine collection with a supersaturation profile, and measurement of serum creatinine concentration (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis).

See Genetic Counselling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



There have been no studies of pregnancy in women with PH3. However, most women with PH1 or PH2 who had good kidney function during pregnancy have done well and have delivered healthy infants [Norby & Milliner 2004].

Adequate fluid intake should be maintained throughout the pregnancy. Circumstances that compromise fluid intake, such as hyperemesis gravidarum, should prompt early initiation of IV fluid to maintain adequate hydration.

Stones that become symptomatic during pregnancy may require routine (but specialized) techniques for management.

In patients with stones, urinary tract infections should be treated promptly and thoroughly due to the potential for bacteria to cause pyelonephritis or infect stones and complicate management.

Therapies Under Investigation



Humans cannot degrade oxalate; however, certain bacteria use oxalate as an energy source. Preliminary studies suggest that oral administration of O. formigenes could reduce oxalate excretion in individuals with PH. Two previous double blind studies were inconclusive [Hoppe et al 2006]. A third clinical trial is under way in Europe, with results expected in 2015.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.