http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pha2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (PHAII), the following evaluations are recommended, if not performed as part of the diagnostic evaluation: Serum electrolyte analysis Noninvasive blood pressure measurement Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Electrolyte and blood pressure abnormalities of PHAII are often corrected with thiazide diuretics. Metabolic abnormalities and hypertension generally improve within one week. Different thiazide diuretics exist, with different dosing regimens. In general dosing is titrated to normalization of blood pressure. It is possible that dosing may need to be increased over time or that additional anti-hypertensives may be required to adequately control blood pressure. There are no established guidelines regarding age at which treatment should begin for individuals with PHAII, but affected children who have hypertension are generally treated.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 See Treatment of Manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Control of blood pressure is important to reduce the risk for cardiovascular and renal disease and stroke.

Surveillance

 Appropriate surveillance includes routine electrolyte and blood pressure measurements, monitored in the same manner as for any person treated with a thiazide diuretic.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Untreated individuals with PHAII should avoid excessive intake of foods high in salt and potassium as these may exacerbate hypertension and hyperkalemia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment. Evaluations can include: Measurement of serum potassium concentration and blood pressure; Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family is known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 During the pregnancy of a woman with PHAII, electrolytes and blood pressure should be monitored regularly and blood pressure medication adjusted as needed. Some antihypertensive medications (including thiazide diuretics) have been associated with adverse fetal outcome, especially when taken during the first trimester of pregnancy. The best time to discuss the risk to the fetus associated with a maternal medication is prior to conception. Women with PHAII who become pregnant should be referred to an obstetrics group with expertise in high risk pregnancies. To access further information on medication use in pregnancy, visit www.mothertobaby.org.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.