http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/phs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS), the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Assessment for cortisol deficiency. This must be performed urgently in individuals who have no family history of PHS and in individuals who have family members with PHS and cortisol deficiency. Of note, adrenal crisis can be lethal in infants who have not undergone proper evaluation and treatment for adrenal insufficiency.

Consultation by an endocrinologist, including evaluation of growth hormone secretion, FSH and LH secretion, and serum concentration of thyroid hormone in early infancy after evaluation for and treatment of ACTH deficiency

Cranial MRI to establish the location and extent of hamartoma

Neurologic examination to exclude signs of intracranial hypertension, which is not typical of hypothalamic hamartomas

Visualization of the epiglottis by laryngoscopy; urgent evaluation by an otolaryngologist for laryngotracheal cleft when signs or symptoms of aspiration are present; elective evaluation by an otolaryngologist in asymptomatic individuals for the purpose of establishing the diagnosis or establishing the extent of anomalies

Limb radiographs to distinguish postaxial polydactyly from central polydactyly

Evaluation by a hand surgeon to assess the timing and surgical approach to correct the polydactyly. Note that the surgical correction of mesoaxial polydactyly is typically more complex than for postaxial polydactyly and should be undertaken by an expert surgeon.

Renal ultrasonography to evaluate for renal anomalies

Surgical consultation for imperforate anus or anal stenosis if present

Developmental assessment

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Endocrine abnormalities are treated as in the general population, with treatment for cortisol deficiency being the most urgent.

Anal atresia or stenosis should be treated in standard fashion.

Management of epiglottic abnormalities depends on the type of abnormality and extent of respiratory compromise and is the same as in the general population. Bifid epiglottis is commonly asymptomatic and most do not require treatment, unless accompanied by clear evidence of obstruction or associated with other anomalies, such as tracheal stenosis.

Seizures are treated symptomatically. Seizures associated with PHS are commonly responsive to antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), whereas seizures associated with nonsyndromic hypothalamic hamartomas are more commonly refractory to AEDs.

Repair of polydactyly should be undertaken on an elective basis.

If developmental delays are detected, intervention and/or special education are indicated.

Occupational therapy for manual dexterity of the hands may be necessary as some individuals with mesoaxial polydactyly have digital malalignment.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Only under the most unusual circumstances should a hypothalamic hamartoma be removed or even biopsied because the complications of surgery and the need for lifelong hormone supplements postoperatively generally outweigh the benefits.

Use of stimulants for attention deficit disorder should be considered carefully in persons with a CNS lesion that predisposes to seizures (e.g., hypothalamic hamartoma).

Surveillance



During childhood:

Annual medical evaluations to assess growth and monitor for signs of precocious puberty

Annual screening for developmental delay or learning disorders

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



As noted in Prevention of Secondary Complications, some stimulants (commonly used for attention deficit and hyperactivity disorders) may exacerbate seizures.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, clinical examination for polydactyly, laryngoscopy for bifid epiglottis, or MRI for hypothalamic hamartoma can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

The first-degree relative of a proband is considered affected if hypothalamic hamartoma or central or postaxial polydactyly are present in the relative. (Postaxial polydactyly type B can be used as a diagnostic criterion for first-degree relatives only in persons who are not of central African descent.)

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Pregnancy management of a woman affected with PHS should be attuned to guidelines for the specific manifestations of the disorder. For example, the management of pregnant women with gelastic epilepsy who need to take anticonvulsants is challenging. As there are no guidelines specific to PHS, the author recommends following general guidelines for anticonvulsants in pregnancy [Borthen & Gilhus 2012].

In general, women with epilepsy or a seizure disorder from any cause are at greater risk for mortality during pregnancy than pregnant women without a seizure disorder; use of antiepileptic medication during pregnancy reduces this risk. However, exposure to antiepileptic medication may increase the risk for adverse fetal outcome (depending on the drug used, the dose, and the stage of pregnancy at which medication is taken). Nevertheless, the risk of an adverse outcome to the fetus from antiepileptic medication exposure is often less than that associated with exposure to an untreated maternal seizure disorder. Therefore, use of antiepileptic medication to treat a maternal seizure disorder during pregnancy is typically recommended. Discussion of the risks and benefits of using a given antiepileptic drug during pregnancy should ideally take place prior to conception. Transitioning to a lower-risk medication prior to pregnancy may be possible [Sarma et al 2016].

The management of fertility and pregnancy (which is uncommon in individuals with hypopituitarism) in individuals with hypopituitarism caused by PHS is similarly challenging and again, it is recommended that general guidelines be followed [Kübler et al 2009].

See MotherToBaby for further information on medication use during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.