http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pkan

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN), the following are recommended if they have not already been completed: Neurologic examination for dystonia, rigidity, choreoathetosis, and spasticity, including evaluation of ambulation and speech Ophthalmologic assessment for evidence of retinopathy Screening developmental assessment, with referral for more formal testing if delay is indicated Assessment for physical therapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 A consensus clinical management guideline for PKAN is available to provide management information at a detailed level [Hogarth et al 2017]. Pharmacologic and surgical interventions have focused on palliation of symptoms. Symptomatic treatment is aimed primarily at the dystonia, which can be profoundly debilitating and distressing to the affected individual and caregivers. Therapies to manage dystonia in affected individuals that have been used with varying success include the following: Intramuscular botulinum toxin Oral baclofen, trihexyphenidyl, and clonazepam: the first-line drugs most commonly effective in PKAN Second-line drugs including clonidine, gabapentin, tetrabenazine, and pregabalin Intrathecal and intraventricular baclofen Deep brain stimulation, used clinically with increasing frequency and some evidence for initial benefit, although it may not be sustained as disease progresses [Lim et al 2012, Garcia-Ruiz et al 2015, Hogarth et al 2017] Ablative pallidotomy or thalmotomy. These ablative procedures have mainly been replaced by DBS, but in certain individuals may still be useful [Dwarakanath et al 2014]. Urgent medical treatment (often hospitalization) for status dystonicus (dystonic storm), which is a common occurrence. The PKAN consensus guideline provides detailed information about approach and management of dystonic storms [Hogarth et al 2017]. Physical and occupational therapy as indicated, particularly for those who are only mildly symptomatic. Therapies to maintain normal joint mobility for as long as possible may be useful. Referral for adaptive aids as needed (e.g., a walker or wheelchair for gait abnormalities) Speech therapy and/or assistive communication devices for PKAN-related dysarthria and speech delay 
            Other manifestations Treatment and interventions for retinopathy as per ophthalmology Referral to appropriate community resources for financial services, services for the blind (if retinopathy is present), and special education

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Recurrent tongue biting from severe orobuccolingual dystonia is a specific challenge that is difficult to manage in PKAN. Customized bite-lock orthodontic appliances can be made and cemented in place to prevent tongue lacerations. Every effort should be made to avoid full dental extraction. Once the individual can no longer maintain an adequate diet orally due to dysphagia or respiratory complications, gastrostomy tube placement is indicated. In later stages of classic disease, tracheostomy may also be indicated.

Surveillance

 As the disease progresses, episodes of extreme distress may last for days or weeks. It is especially important during these episodes to evaluate for treatable causes of pain. These may include occult GI bleeding, urinary tract infections, mouth lacerations, and occult bone fractures. The combination of osteopenia in a nonambulatory individual with marked stress on long bones from dystonia places individuals with PKAN at especially high risk for fractures without apparent trauma. The following should be performed on a regular basis: Monitoring of height and weight using appropriate growth curves to screen children for worsening nutritional status Ophthalmologic assessment Oral assessment for consequences of trauma Assessment of ambulation, environmental adaptations, speech abilities, and communication needs to help affected individuals to maintain independence Swallowing evaluation and regular dietary assessments to assure adequate nutrition

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Anecdotal reports of three sibs with atypical PKAN treated with alpha-tocopherol and idebenone indicated worsening of symptoms, with subsequent improvement once these compounds were stopped [JP Harpey, personal communication].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Related Genetic Counseling Issues.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Iron chelation. Interest in iron chelation has reemerged as data on deferiprone (Ferriprox®) have accumulated in several populations of affected individuals. Unlike earlier drugs, deferiprone crosses the blood-brain barrier and removes intracellular iron. One small Phase II pilot trial has been performed to assess deferiprone in the PKAN population. Deferiprone was tolerated well in the nine affected individuals who completed the study, and there was a statistically significant reduction of iron in the pallida by MRI evaluation. However, there was no change in their clinical status. The authors suggested that a longer trial period may be necessary to produce clinical amelioration [Zorzi et al 2011]. An international randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of deferiprone was recently completed and the data are currently being analyzed (clinicaltrials.gov). Additional therapies. Multiple compounds are currently in development for PKAN and anticipated to go to clinical trial. Clinicians should check ClinicalTrials.gov regularly and maintain contact with PKAN investigators.

Other

 Pantothenate. The existence of residual enzyme activity in some individuals with PKAN raises the possibility of treatment using high-dose pantothenate, the PANK2 enzyme substrate. Pantothenate has no known toxicity in humans; high oral doses of pantothenic acid or calcium pantothenate (≤10 g/day for several weeks) do not appear to be toxic to humans. The efficacy of pantothenate supplementation in ameliorating symptoms is currently unknown; some individuals with an atypical disease course have anecdotally reported improvement in their symptoms (dysarthria, gait imbalance, sense of well-being) when taking pantothenate. Docosahexanoic acid (DHA). Based on the role of coenzyme A in the synthesis and degradation of fatty acids, the importance of DHA as a major component of rod photoreceptor disc membranes, and the observation of retinal degeneration in a large portion of individuals with PKAN, DHA may have a role in preventing this complication, although no studies have yet been performed. The compound may be provided as an oral nutritional supplement in the form of omega-3 fats (fish oil) and is without known toxicity. 
            Other treatments Therapies that may have a role in other forms of NBIA but generally do not help individuals with PKAN include levodopa/carbidopa and bromocriptine. Treatment of PKAN with phosphopantothenate, the product of pantothenate kinase, is complicated by the lack of available compound as well as any information about its safety or toxicity in humans or animals. Furthermore, it is unlikely that phosphopantothenate would be readily transported across cell membranes, making the success of this hypothetical treatment doubtful.