

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD), the following evaluations are recommended: Respiratory status, including physical examination, pulse oximetry, and chest radiographs (as indicated) Tests of renal function, including serum concentrations of BUN, creatinine, and cystatin C, which allows a more accurate estimation of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) [Gunay-Aygun et al 2010a] Serum electrolyte concentrations to identify electrolyte abnormalities (e.g., hyponatremia, hyperkalemia) Urinalysis to assess for the urinary concentration and proteinuria. Clinical assessment of intravascular volume status for possible volume depletion or overload. Note: White blood cells are commonly present in the urine of children with ARPKD and may not represent infection. If there is a clinical suspicion of urinary tract infection, a urine culture should be obtained before initiating treatment. Renal ultrasonography (consider high-resolution technology when available) Measurement of blood pressure. If elevated, home blood pressure monitoring can be helpful in distinguishing fixed hypertension from “white coat” hypertension (i.e., high blood pressure that occurs during medical examinations). Assessment of feeding, weight gain, and linear growth with formal nutrition consultation as appropriate Measurement of liver transaminases, serum bile acids, hepatic synthetic function (e.g., by assessing serum albumin concentration, 25-OH vitamin D levels, vitamin E levels and coagulation studies), fat-soluble vitamin levels, complete blood counts, physical examination for hepatomegaly/splenomegaly, and abdominal ultrasonography to assess the clinical extent of liver involvement Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 (See recent comprehensive reviews including Sweeney & Avner [2011], Telega et al [2013], Guay-Woodford et al [2014], Sweeney & Avner [2014], and Sweeney et al [2016] for detailed management strategies.) Initial management of affected infants centers on stabilization of respiratory function. 
            Respiratory
           Mechanical ventilation may be necessary to treat pulmonary hypoplasia (characterized by inability to oxygenate despite jet or oscillating ventilation with 100% oxygen) or hypoventilation from massively enlarged kidneys (characterized by increased pCO2 despite adequate oxygenation). It may also be required in the first 48-72 hours postnatally to determine whether pulmonary hypoplasia or reversible pulmonary disease is present. When massively enlarged kidneys prevent diaphragmatic excursion and/or cause severe feeding intolerance, some have advocated unilateral or bilateral nephrectomy [Shukla et al 2004]. Experience suggests that unilateral nephrectomy may be of limited value, since the contralateral kidney often shows marked enlargement following unilateral nephrectomy [Author, unpublished observations] Bilateral nephrectomy with placement of a peritoneal dialysis catheter followed by a short period of hemodialysis often allows the peritoneum to heal in preparation for chronic peritoneal dialysis [Sweeney & Avner 2011, Sweeney et al 2016]. The timing of these procedures, as well as potential coordination with a preemptive living donor transplantation, will be dictated by factors such as the age, size, and clinical status of the patient as well as living donor availability. 
            Renal
           Neonates with oliguria or anuria may require peritoneal dialysis within the first days of life. Hyponatremia is common and should be treated depending on the individual's volume status. Early recognition and treatment of dehydration is critical. Supplemental feedings or fluid therapy via nasogastric or gastrostomy tubes may be required. Hypertension generally responds well to angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor inhibitors (ARBs), which are the treatments of choice. In many cases, hypertension may be severe enough to require multiple antihypertensive medications. Affected children with significant chronic kidney disease should be treated with all modalities of modern pediatric end-stage renal disease (ESRD) therapy, including dialysis and kidney transplantation. Anemia in children with Stage III or higher chronic kidney disease may require treatment with iron supplementation and erythropoietin-stimulating agents (ESAs). Liver. Treatment of biliary dysfunction focuses on: (1) malabsorption of nutrients and fat-soluble vitamins; and (2) the risk for ascending cholangitis. Administration of synthetic bile acids The presence of poor serum levels of fat-soluble vitamins (K, D, E, A) or poor weight gain despite adequate caloric supplementation may indicate the need for bile acid supplementation. Clinical suspicion of bile acid deficiency may be verified by measurement of serum bile acids. Administration of synthetic bile acids is indicated if there is evidence of significant intrahepatic ductal dilation (Caroli syndrome), which can be appreciated by magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP). Bacterial cholangitis, often an underdiagnosed complication in those with hepatic involvement, may present as recurrent bacteremia with enteric pathogens without typical clinical features of cholangitis. Persistent fevers, particularly with right upper-quadrant pain, should be evaluated and treated aggressively. Alkaline phosphatase and γGTP may be elevated during episodes of acute ascending cholangitis and may be helpful in establishing a diagnosis [Telega et al 2013, Sweeney et al 2016]. Esophageal varices should be treated with endoscopic banding or sclerotherapy as indicated. Portosystemic shunting may be necessary to treat progressive portal hypertension; however, Tsimaratos et al [2000] reported recurrent hepatic encephalopathy and death following portocaval shunting in two individuals with ARPKD who had ESRD. In severe instances of intractable portal hypertension, or severe dual renal and hepatobiliary disease, hepatic or dual renal-hepatic transplantation has become a viable option [Telega et al 2013, Chandar et al 2015]. Dual-organ transplantation. Successful simultaneous liver-kidney transplantation in individuals with ARPKD has been reported in a small case series [Harps et al 2011, Chapal et al 2012, Brinkert et al 2013, Telega et al 2013]. Previously, only a small percent of individuals with ARPKD, particularly those diagnosed later in life, have required liver transplantation. However, with improved survival and advances in renal replacement therapy, it is likely that the number of individuals with ARPKD requiring liver transplantation may increase. An algorithm for evaluating the risk benefit of dual organ transplant in individuals with ARPKD who have both severe kidney and liver disease has been proposed to assist clinicians in the decision-making process [Telega et al 2013]. See Table 2 (pdf) and Figure 1. 
            Feeding and growth
           Feeding intolerance and growth failure, even in the absence of renal insufficiency, can be significant, especially in young infants. Aggressive nutritional support, which may include supplemental feedings via nasogastric or gastrostomy tubes, is often required to optimize weight gain and growth [Dell et al 2009, Sweeney & Avner 2011, Hartung & Guay-Woodford 2014, Sweeney & Avner 2014]. Children with growth failure may benefit from treatment with growth hormone [Lilova et al 2003]. The optimal age for starting growth hormone therapy depends on the growth velocity of the child; studies suggest that treatment is beneficial in children with chronic kidney disease who are age two years or younger [Seikaly et al 2007, Schaeffer 2016].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Ursodeoxycholic acid (ursodiol or Actigall®) is a bile acid that can be used to increase the amount and flow of bile and/or to reduce the development of gallstones in individuals with ARPKD who have significant hepatobiliary disease. With severe portal hypertension and splenic dysfunction, immunization against encapsulated bacteria (pneumococcus; H. influenza type B; meningococcus) is indicated. Updated guidelines advise that palivizumab (Synagis®) be administered to at-risk children younger than age 24 months who have chronic lung disease and/or a history of prematurity [Committee on Infectious Diseases 2009]. Although the role of chronic antibiotic prophylaxis in all children with ARPKD remains controversial, prophylaxis with antibiotics is recommended for persons with ARPKD who are at high risk of developing ascending cholangitis, including those who have experienced an episode of ascending cholangitis in the past.

Surveillance

 The following should be monitored regularly, depending on disease course and complications: Blood pressure monitored at periodic physician's visits as well as home blood pressure monitoring if indicated (see Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis) Renal function in those with chronic kidney disease Stage III or less; close monitoring for the complications of CKD should be undertaken by the treating nephrologist according to standard practices outlined in the KDOQI Guidelines. Electrolyte balance, monitored by obtaining serum concentrations of sodium, potassium, and chloride. Mineral balance, monitored by assessing calcium and phosphorous. If the calcium level is low, magnesium concentration should be evaluated [Dell et al 2009, Sweeney & Avner 2011, Sweeney & Avner 2014]. Hydration status Nutritional status, with growth plotted on standard growth charts and nutrition consultation as indicated Hepatoportal duct involvement, by physical examination and complete blood counts, in addition to serum albumin levels, PT/PTT, and 25-OH vitamin D, vitamin E levels, and fat-soluble vitamin levels If hepatomegaly is present and/or splenomegaly develops, additional monitoring including periodic ultrasonography or MRI. With hepatosplenomegaly, referral to a pediatric hepatologist is suggested for evaluation and periodic monitoring by esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) to detect esophageal varices [Telega et al 2013]. Consideration of MR cholangiography, a more sensitive measurement for biliary ectasia, at baseline and then as indicated [Shneider & Magid 2005, Telega et al 2013, Sweeney et al 2016]

Agents to Avoid

 The following should be avoided: For affected individuals with hypertension, sympathomimetic agents In general, unless the clinical situation warrants their use, known nephrotoxic agents including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and aminoglycosides Potentially hepatotoxic agents (e.g., acetaminophen doses >30 mg/kg/day, herbal supplements, and alcohol) should be minimized. Work in cell and animal models suggests that caffeine, theophylline-like agents, and calcium channel blockers may exacerbate renal cyst formation and growth. However, this has not been rigorously studied in individuals with ARPKD or ADPKD.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband/in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known; High-resolution renal and hepatic ultrasonographic evaluation and monitoring of systemic blood pressure if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Recent studies in two animal models of ARPKD suggest that tesevatinib (TSV), a unique multikinase inhibitor, markedly slows the progression of both renal cystic disease and hepatobiliary disease [Sweeney et al, in press]. These data, in addition to safety data generated by Phase I-II multicenter clinical trial of TSV (also called KD-019) in ADPKD (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01559363) have led to an initial Phase I-II multicenter clinical trial of TSV in infants and children with ARPKD planned for late fall of 2016 or early 2017. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.