

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), the following evaluations are recommended: Renal ultrasound examination (particularly when CT or MRI of the abdomen is unavailable) can be helpful to determine the severity of disease. Ultrasound can provide an estimate of size and distribution of cysts and of overall kidney size, but CT or MRI is more sensitive and allows for better quantification of the disease severity (see following). CT or MRI of the abdomen with and without contrast enhancement to help determine the extent of cystic disease in the kidneys and liver, as well as to estimate the prognosis. CT, but not MRI, can detect stones and parenchymal calcifications. CT or MR angiography (MRA) can be used when visualization of the renal arteries is necessary. MRI can be used when administration of iodinated contrast material is contraindicated. Standardized blood pressure screening per the recommendations of the American Heart Association to detect early stages of hypertension. When "white coat" hypertension (i.e., blood pressure that is elevated when measured in the clinic, but normal when measured outside of the clinic) is suspected, ambulatory blood pressure monitoring is appropriate. Measurement of blood lipid concentrations because hyperlipidemia is a correctable risk factor for progressive renal disease, including ADPKD Urine studies to detect the presence of microalbuminuria or proteinuria, which in the presence of severe renal cystic disease indicates an increased likelihood of disease progression and mandates strict control of the blood pressure Echocardiography in persons with heart murmurs or systolic clicks possibly resulting from valvular heart disease, mitral valve prolapse, or congenital cardiac abnormalities Echocardiography or cardiac MRI to screen persons at high risk because of a family history of thoracic aortic dissections Head MRA or CT angiography to screen persons at high risk because of a family history of intracranial aneurysms. Note: Screening for intracranial aneurysms in individuals without a family history of intracranial aneurysms is not recommended [Irazabal et al 2011].

Treatment of Manifestations

 Current therapy for ADPKD is directed toward reducing morbidity and mortality from the renal and extrarenal complications of the disease. Hypertension. The antihypertensive agent(s) of choice in ADPKD have not been clearly established. However, because of the role of the renin angiotensin system in the pathogenesis of hypertension in ADPKD, ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor antagonists may be superior to other agents in individuals with preserved renal function. ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor blockers increase renal blood flow, have a low side-effect profile, and may reduce vascular smooth muscle proliferation and development of atherosclerosis: The administration of ACE inhibitors, but not the administration of calcium channel blockers, has been shown to reduce microalbuminuria in individuals with ADPKD [Ecder & Schrier 2001]. In an historic, non-randomized study, the administration of ACE inhibitors without diuretics was found to result in a lower rate of decline in glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and less proteinuria than the administration of a diuretic without an ACE inhibitor for similar control of blood pressure [Ecder & Schrier 2001]. Another study found no renal protective effect of an ACE inhibitor over a β-blocker [van Dijk et al 2003]; another study found that although more rigorous blood pressure control did not preserve renal function, it did lead to a greater decrease in left ventricular mass [Schrier et al 2002]. A long-term follow-up of the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) Study showed that individuals with ADPKD randomized to a low blood pressure target (mean arterial pressure [MAP] <92 mmHg) experienced significantly less ESRD and combined ESRD/death than those randomized to the usual blood pressure target (MAP <107 mmHg) [Sarnak et al 2005]. The recent HALT PKD trial did not show a benefit of the addition of an angiotensin II-receptor blocker (ARB) to an ACE inhibitor in terms of preserving renal function [Torres et al 2014]. In the same trial, a lower blood pressure target (95-110/60-75 mm Hg) compared to the standard target (120-130/70-80 mm Hg) in younger affected individuals with preserved renal function was associated with a slower increase in kidney volume but no overall change in the decline in renal function, as measured by eGFR. Flank pain. After excluding causes of flank pain that may require intervention, such as infection, stone, or tumor, an initial conservative approach to pain management is best: Nonopioid agents are preferred and care should be taken to avoid long-term administration of nephrotoxic agents such as combination analgesic and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Tricyclic antidepressants are helpful, as in all chronic pain syndromes, and are well tolerated. Narcotic analgesics should be reserved for the management of acute episodes, as chronic use can lead to physical and psychological dependence. Splanchnic nerve blockade with local anesthetics or steroids can result in pain relief beyond the duration of the local anesthetic. When conservative measures fail, therapy can be directed toward cyst decompression with cyst aspiration and sclerosis: Cyst aspiration, under ultrasound or CT guidance, is a relatively simple procedure carried out routinely by interventional radiologists. Complications from aspiration of centrally located cysts are more common, and the morbidity of the procedure is proportional to the number of cysts treated. Cyst aspiration can help to establish causality between a cyst and the presence of pain, but seldom provides long-lasting relief because of fluid reaccumulation. Sclerosing agents, such as 95% ethanol or acidic solutions of minocycline, are commonly used to prevent the reaccumulation of cyst fluid. Good results have been obtained with 95% ethanol, achieving a success rate of 90% in benign renal cysts. Minor complications include: microhematuria, localized pain, transient fever, and systemic absorption of the alcohol. More serious complications such as pneumothorax, perirenal hematoma, arteriovenous fistula, urinoma, and infection are rare. In individuals with many cysts contributing to pain, laparoscopic or surgical cyst fenestration through lumbotomy or flank incision, renal denervation, and (in those who have reached ESRD) nephrectomy may be of benefit: Surgical decompression was effective in 80% to 90% of individuals for one year; 62% to 77% had sustained pain relief for longer than two years. Surgical intervention neither accelerates the decline in renal function nor preserves remaining renal function. Laparoscopic fenestration has been shown to be as effective as open surgical fenestration in short-term follow-up for individuals with limited disease and has a shorter, less complicated recovery period than open surgery. Renal denervation via a thoracoscopic approach was successful in one affected individual [Chapuis et al 2004]. Recently, percutaneous transluminal catheter-based denervation was shown to be effective for the treatment of kidney pain in single case reports [Shetty et al 2013, Casteleijn et al 2014 ]. Laparoscopic and retroperitonoscopic nephrectomy and arterial embolization have been used to treat symptomatic polycystic kidneys in individuals with ADPKD who have ESRD [Ubara et al 1999, Dunn et al 2000]. Hand-assisted laparoscopic nephrectomy may be preferable to standard laparoscopic nephrectomy because of shorter operating time and lower morbidity [Lee & Clayman 2004]. Cyst hemorrhage and gross hematuria. Episodes of cyst hemorrhage or of gross hematuria are usually self-limited and respond well to conservative management with bed rest, analgesics, and adequate hydration to prevent development of obstructing clots. Rarely, episodes of bleeding are severe with extensive subcapsular or retroperitoneal hematoma, significant drop in hematocrit, and hemodynamic instability. In such cases, individuals require hospitalization, transfusion, and investigation by CT or angiography. In cases of unusually severe or persistent hemorrhage, segmental arterial embolization can be successful. If not, surgery may be required to control bleeding. Gross hematuria persisting more than one week or developing for the first time in an individual older than age 50 years requires thorough investigation. Nephrolithiasis. Small uric acid stones can be missed on nephrotomography and are best detected by CT. CT should be obtained before and after the administration of contrast material to confirm the localization within the collecting system and to differentiate calculi from parenchymal calcifications. Dual absorption CT now facilitates the differentiation of uric acid stones from calcium-containing stones. Excretory urography detects precaliceal tubular ectasia in 15% of individuals with ADPKD. The treatment of nephrolithiasis in individuals with ADPKD is the same as that for individuals without ADPKD: High fluid intake and potassium citrate are the treatment of choice in uric acid lithiasis, hypocitric calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis, and distal acidification defects. Medical dissolution of uric acid stones can usually be achieved by a program of high fluid intake, urine alkalinization (to maintain a pH of 6-6.5), and administration of allopurinol. Extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy and percutaneous nephrostolithotomy can be successful in individuals with ADPKD without excessive complications [Umbreit et al 2010]. Cyst infection. If cyst infection is suspected, diagnostic imaging should be undertaken to assist in the diagnosis: CT and MRI are sensitive for detecting complicated cysts and provide anatomic definition, but the findings are not specific for infection. Nuclear imaging, especially indium-labeled white cell scanning, is useful, but false negative and false positive results are possible. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography scanning is the most sensitive method to detect an infected cyst, but it is expensive, not readily available and may not be reimbursed by insurance companies [Sallée et al 2009]. In the appropriate clinical setting of fever, flank pain, and suggestive diagnostic imaging, cyst aspiration under ultrasound or CT guidance should be undertaken to culture the organism and assist in selection of antimicrobial therapy, particularly if blood and urine cultures are negative [Torres et al 2007a]. Cyst infection is often difficult to treat. It has a high treatment failure rate despite prolonged therapy with an antibiotic to which the organism is susceptible. Treatment failure results from the inability of certain antibiotics to penetrate the cyst epithelium successfully and achieve therapeutic concentrations within the cyst. The epithelium that lines gradient cysts has functional and ultrastructural characteristics of the distal tubule epithelium. Penetration is via tight junctions, allowing only lipid-soluble agent access. Non-gradient cysts, which are more common, allow solute access via diffusion. However, kinetic studies indicate that water-soluble agents penetrate non-gradient cysts slowly and irregularly, resulting in unreliable drug concentrations within the cysts. Lipophilic agents have been shown to penetrate both gradient and non-gradient cysts equally and reliably and have a pKa that allows for favorable electrochemical gradients into acidic cyst fluids. Therapeutic agents of choice include trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and fluoroquinolones. Clindamycin, vancomycin, and metronidazole are also able to penetrate cysts well. Chloramphenicol has shown therapeutic efficacy in otherwise refractory disease. If fever persists after one to two weeks of appropriate antimicrobial therapy, percutaneous or surgical drainage of infected cysts should be undertaken. If fever recurs after discontinuation of antibiotics, complicating features such as obstruction, perinephric abscess, or stones should be considered and treated appropriately. If complicating features are not identified, the course of previously effective therapy should be extended; several months may be required to completely eradicate the infection. Malignancy. The diagnosis of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) in a polycystic kidney requires a high index of suspicion. MRI with gadolinium enhancement is particularly helpful to detect atypical solid or cystic masses, tumor thrombi, and regional lymphadenopathy. The diagnosis of transitional cell carcinoma in a polycystic kidney is equally challenging and usually requires retrograde pyelography or ureteroscopy. End-stage renal disease (ESRD). Therapeutic interventions aimed at slowing the progression of ESRD in ADPKD include control of hypertension and hyperlipidemia, dietary protein restriction, control of acidosis, and prevention of hyperphosphatemia. Animal data support the role of dietary protein restriction and careful control of hypertension in slowing the rate of renal failure in PKD [Qian et al 2001]. However, the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) trial showed no beneficial effect on renal function of strict (compared with standard) blood pressure control and only a slight (borderline significant) beneficial effect of a very low protein diet. Because these interventions were introduced at a late state of the disease (GFR 13-55 mL/min per 1.73 m2), the results do not exclude a beneficial effect of interventions introduced at an earlier stage of the disease. Actuarial data indicate that individuals with ADPKD do better on dialysis than individuals with ESRD from other causes. Females appear to do better than males. The reason for this improved outcome is unclear but may relate to better-maintained hemoglobin levels through higher endogenous erythropoietin production. Rarely, hemodialysis can be complicated by intradialytic hypotension if the inferior vena cava is compressed by a medially located renal cyst. Despite renal size, peritoneal dialysis can usually be performed in individuals with ADPKD; although these individuals are at increased risk for inguinal and umbilical hernias, which require surgical repair. There is no difference in patient or graft survival between individuals with ADPKD and those with ESRD caused by other conditions. Living donor transplantation for ADPKD, which requires exclusion of ADPKD in the donor (see Testing Strategy), has increased in the last two decades. Nephrectomy of the native kidneys is reserved for affected individuals with a history of infected cysts, frequent bleeding, severe hypertension, or massive renal enlargement. There is no consensus on the optimal timing of nephrectomy; whether nephrectomy is performed before, at, or following transplantation depends to some extent on the indication for the nephrectomy and other patient-specific considerations [Lucas et al 2010, Kirkman et al 2011]. Hand-assisted laparoscopic nephrectomy is increasingly being used [Lee & Clayman 2004]. Complications after transplantation are no greater than in the general population. Complications directly related to ADPKD are rare. One study has suggested an increased risk for thromboembolic complications [Jacquet et al 2011]. Whether individuals with ADPKD are at increased risk for new-onset diabetes mellitus after transplantation (NODAT) is questionable [Ruderman et al 2012]. Polycystic liver disease. Most individuals with polycystic liver disease have no symptoms and require no treatment. The treatment of symptomatic disease includes the avoidance of estrogens and caffeine and the use of H2 blockers or proton pump inhibitors for symptomatic relief. Severe symptoms may require percutaneous aspiration and sclerosis, laparoscopic fenestration, combined hepatic resection and cyst fenestration, liver transplantation, or selective hepatic artery embolization. Any of these interventions should be tailored to the individual [Torres 2007, Drenth et al 2010]. Cyst aspiration and sclerosis with alcohol or minocyline is the treatment of choice for symptoms caused by one or a small number of dominant cysts. Before instillation of the sclerosing agent, a contrast medium is injected into the cyst to evaluate for communication with the bile ducts. The success rate of this procedure (70% after a single treatment and an additional 20% after repeated treatment) is inversely correlated with the size of the cyst(s). Laparoscopic fenestration of hepatic cysts, a less commonly performed procedure, is complicated by transient ascites in 40% of individuals; and the results are often short-lived. Thus, laparoscopic cyst fenestration is indicated only for the treatment of disproportionally large cysts as an alternative to percutaneous sclerosis. Neither percutaneous sclerosis nor laparoscopic fenestration is helpful in individuals with large polycystic livers with many small- and medium-sized cysts. In most individuals, part of the liver is spared, allowing treatment by combined hepatic resection and cyst fenestration. Because the surgery and recovery can be difficult, with complications such as transient ascites and bile leaks and a perioperative mortality of 2.5%, it should be performed only in specialized centers [Schnelldorfer et al 2009]. The surgery has good long-term results in individuals with severe polycystic liver disease and is often preferable to liver transplantation, which is reserved for those individuals for whom liver resection is not feasible or for those individuals in whom liver function is impaired. Because individuals with severe polycystic liver disease have mostly normal liver function, their MELD (model for end-stage liver disease) scores are low, placing them at a disadvantage for organ allocation. For highly selected individuals in this group, caval sparing hepatectomy and subsequent living donor liver transplantation could provide a potential alternative [Mekeel et al 2008]. Selective hepatic artery embolization can be considered for highly symptomatic patients who are not surgical candidates [Takei et al 2007]. Ruptured or symptomatic intracranial aneurysm. The mainstay of therapy is surgical clipping of the ruptured aneurysm at its neck. 
            Asymptomatic aneurysms Those aneurysms measuring 5.0 mm or smaller in diameter and diagnosed by presymptomatic screening can be observed and followed initially at yearly intervals. If the size increases, surgery is indicated. The management of aneurysms 6.0-9.0 mm in size remains controversial. Surgical intervention is usually indicated for aneurysms larger than 10.0 mm in diameter. For individuals with high surgical risk or with technically difficult-to-manage lesions, endovascular treatment with detachable platinum coils may be indicated. Endovascular treatment seems to be associated with fewer complications than clipping, but the long-term efficacy of this method is as yet unproven [Pirson et al 2002]. Aortic dissection. When the aortic root diameter reaches 55 mm to 60 mm, replacement of the aorta is indicated.

Surveillance

 Early detection of hypertension. Children with a family history of ADPKD should have their blood pressure (BP) monitored by a practitioner with experience in measurement of BP in children [Chapman et al 2015]. Screening from age five years onward, with an interval of three years in cases in which no hypertension is found, seems prudent. The diagnosis of hypertension is made when systolic or diastolic BP is ≥95th percentile for age, height, and sex, in accordance with prevailing pediatric guidelines Renal cell carcinoma. There is currently insufficient evidence for recommending screening in asymptomatic individuals with ADPKD. Intracranial aneurysms. Widespread screening is usually not recommended since most intracranial aneurysms found by screening asymptomatic individuals are small, have a low risk of rupture, and require no treatment [Gibbs et al 2004, Irazabal et al 2011, Chapman et al 2015], although dissenting opinions have been published [Rozenfeld et al 2014]. Indications for screening in affected individuals with a good life expectancy include a family history of intracranial aneurysms or subarachnoid hemorrhage, previous rupture of an aneurysm, preparation for elective surgery with potential hemodynamic instability, high-risk occupations such as airplane pilots, and significant anxiety on the part of the individual despite adequate risk information. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is the diagnostic imaging modality of choice for presymptomatic screening because it is noninvasive and does not require intravenous contrast material. Because only one of 76 individuals with an initial negative study had a new intracranial aneurysm after a mean follow-up of 9.8 years, rescreening after an interval of ten years has been suggested as a reasonable approach [Schrier et al 2004]. Aortic dissection. Until more information becomes available, it is reasonable to screen first-degree adult relatives of individuals with thoracic aortic dissection using either echocardiography or MRI. If aortic root dilatation is found, yearly follow-up and strict blood pressure control with beta blockers should be recommended. Cardiac valvular abnormalities. Screening echocardiography is not recommended unless a murmur is detected or there are other cardiovascular signs or symptoms [Chapman et al 2015]. Colon diverticulosis. Routine screening for diverticulosis is not recommended, but physicians should be aware of a possible increased occurrence of diverticulosis or diverticulitis in individuals with ADPKD who have reached ESRD [Chapman et al 2015].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 The following should be avoided: Long-term administration of nephrotoxic agents such as combination analgesics and NSAIDs Caffeine in large amounts because it interferes with the breakdown of cAMP and hence may promote renal cyst growth Use of estrogens and possibly progestogens in individuals with severe polycystic liver disease [Alvaro et al 2006, Glaser et al 2008] Smoking

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 The initial evaluation of at-risk relatives over age 18 years should be imaging with abdominal ultrasound examination, CT, or MRI. When the findings on imaging are equivocal or if the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing may be appropriate. Presymptomatic diagnosis: Allows those found to be affected to become better educated about the disease; Permits early detection and treatment of complications and associated disorders; Reassures those found to be unaffected. A molecular diagnosis provides information for family planning choices, including PGD. Note: (1) Appropriate counseling prior to imaging or molecular testing, including a discussion of the possible impact on insurability and employability, is most important. (2) At present, there is no indication for testing of asymptomatic children. This may change in the future, if and when effective therapies are developed. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 The literature on pregnancy and PKD is limited. Pregnant women with ADPKD should be monitored closely for the development of hypertension and urinary tract infections. Pregnant women who develop hypertension during pregnancy or who have impaired renal function are at increased risk and should be monitored closely for the development of preeclampsia, intrauterine fetal growth restriction, and oligohydramnios. A second-trimester prenatal sonographic examination is indicated if either parent has ADPKD to assess fetal kidney size and echogenicity, presence of fetal kidney cysts, and amniotic fluid volume [Vora et al 2008].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Significant advances in the understanding of the genetics of ADPKD and the mechanisms of cyst growth have revealed likely targets for therapeutic intervention. Vasopressin V2 receptor antagonists. Of particular interest are recent studies that have shown that modulation of cAMP levels by targeting the vasopressin V2 receptor can dramatically inhibit cyst development in animal models of nephronophthisis, ARPKD, and ADPKD [Gattone et al 2003, Torres et al 2004, Wang et al 2005, Wang et al 2008]. A phase II open-label clinical trial [Higashihara et al 2011] and a phase III global, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial with a vasopressin V2 receptor antagonist (tolvaptan) were completed [Torres 2008, Torres et al 2011b, Torres et al 2012]. The phase III trial, which extended over three years, included 1445 affected individuals with preserved renal function but large kidney volumes. The increase in kidney volume in the treated group was 2.8% per year compared to 5.5% in the untreated group. Use of tolvaptan was also associated with a slower decline in kidney function. There were fewer kidney related adverse events in the treated group but more aquaresis, and elevations in liver enzyme levels occurred in some affected individuals on tolvptan. Tolvaptan was approved for clinical use in persons with ADPKD and rapidly enlarging kidneys in Japan in 2014 and in Canada in 2015; it has not been approved for use in the US or Europe at the time of this update. Somatostatin analogs. Octreotide, a long-acting form of somatostatin, has been shown to slow the enlargement of polycystic kidneys and livers in an animal model of PKD [Masyuk et al 2007] and of polycystic kidneys and liver in a small randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover study [Ruggenenti et al 2005, Caroli et al 2010]. Two randomized, placebo controlled trials of octreotide and lanreotide for polycystic kidney and liver disease have shown that the administration of these somatostatin analogs causes a moderate but significant reduction in liver volume and decreases the growth velocity of polycystic kidneys compared to placebo [van Keimpema et al 2009, Hogan et al 2010]. Recently, a randomized, three-year, single-blind, placebo-controlled trial of octreotide long-acting release (LAR) in 75 affected individuals (38 of whom received octreotide-LAR and 37 of whom received placebo) was completed in Italy [Caroli et al 2013]. The numeric increase in kidney and liver size was significantly smaller in the treated group after one year; after three years, the size of the organs was smaller in the treated group versus the untreated group, but the difference was no longer statistically significant for either organ. Larger and longer randomized studies are needed to determine whether these drugs can be administered safely to persons with ADPKD and/or polycystic liver disease and whether they are efficacious. Studies of tolvaptan and the somatostatin analog pasireotide in a Pkd1 mouse model showed an additive effect of the combined treatment [Hopp et al 2015]. mTOR inhibitors modulate the enlargement of polycystic kidneys in animal models of PKD. Their effectiveness, however, depends on the blood levels that can be achieved in different models. They are consistently effective in mouse models but not rat models because mice tolerate higher doses and blood levels compared to rats [Shillingford et al 2010, Spirli et al 2010, Zafar et al 2010]. mTOR inhibitors are effective in a paradigm in which cysts develop from the proximal tubules [Tao et al 2005, Shillingford et al 2006, Wahl et al 2006], but not in one in which cysts derive from the distal nephron and collecting duct [Renken et al 2011], as is the case in human ADPKD. The results of clinical trials of mTOR inhibitors for ADPKD have been mostly disappointing. A randomized, open-label, placebo controlled study of 100 affected individuals with an estimated creatinine clearance of >70 mL/min and a mean kidney volume of 907 mL (treated group) and 1003 mL (placebo group) showed no significant effect of treatment with sirolimus for 18 months on either kidney volume or GFR [Serra et al 2010], possibly because intended dosage was limited by toxicity of the drug and blood levels achieved may not have been enough to inhibit mTOR activity in the kidney [Canaud et al 2010]. A randomized, crossover study of 15 individuals with ADPKD who had an eGFR ≥40 mL/min/1.73 m2 demonstrated that treatment with sirolimus for six months was associated with a smaller increase in total kidney volume compared to placebo [Perico et al 2010]. A randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled study of everolimus (another mTOR inhibitor) in 431 affected individuals with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of >30 mL/min/1.73 m2 and a mean kidney volume of 2028 mL (treated group) and 1911 mL (placebo group) demonstrated that the administration of everolimus for 24 months was associated with a slower rate of increase in total kidney volume and a faster rate of decline in eGFR [Walz et al 2010]. Limitations of this study include the advanced stage of renal insufficiency in many study individuals (6.2% with an eGFR at enrollment below the inclusion limit of 30 mL/min) and the high dropout rate among study participants, particularly in the study group (33%). An open-label pilot study of 30 adults with ADPKD randomly assigned to low-dose or standard-dose rapamycin or to standard care showed a significant increase in GFR measured by iothalamate clearance in the low dose rapamycin compared with the standard care group, without a significant effect on kidney volume or eGFR after 12 months [Braun et al 2014]. These clinical trials of mTOR inhibitors [Perico et al 2010, Serra et al 2010, Walz et al 2010
Braun et al 2014] have been accompanied by significant drug toxicity. Antagonists of the epidermal growth factor receptor [Sweeney et al 2000] and other agents targeting cell proliferation or fluid secretion have been effective in animal models of polycystic kidney disease, but are not yet in clinical trials [Torres et al 2007c]. A clinical trial of the Src inhibitor bosutinib is underway. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.