http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pku

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended: Medical biochemical genetics consultation, if not already done, and evaluation by a metabolic dietician able to begin a low Phe, age-appropriate diet Blood phenylalanine concentration and estimation of phenylalanine tolerance [Kayaalp et al 1997, Guldberg et al 1998]. Because the PAH genotype may not always predict phenotype (see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations), the individual's diet should be tailored to the estimated phenylalanine tolerance irrespective of genotype. For individuals diagnosed outside the newborn period, formal developmental, behavioral, neuropsychological, and mental health evaluation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment for affected individuals of all ages can be difficult and is enhanced with the teaching and support of an experienced healthcare team consisting of physicians, nutritionists, genetic counselors, social workers, nurses, and psychologists. See ACMG Management Guidelines for PKU.

Treatment of Classic PKU

Restriction of dietary phenylalanine. The generally accepted goal of treatment for individuals with PAH deficiency is normalization of the concentrations of Phe (phenylalanine) and Tyr (tyrosine) in the blood and thus prevention of the cognitive deficits that are attributable to this disorder [Burgard et al 1999]. Genetic Metabolic Dieticians International (GMDI) has PKU Nutrition Management Guidelines that are continually updated. Any provider managing the diet of an individual with PAH deficiency should use these resources and work closely with a dietician knowledgeable in the care and management of a person with this diagnosis. Singh et al [2014] provide the following dietary recommendations: Maintain blood Phe between 120 and 360 μmol/L throughout the life span. Monitor blood Phe most frequently during times of increased anabolism: infancy, childhood, and pregnancy. The NIH recommends measurement of blood phenylalanine levels on a weekly basis for the first year of life, on a biweekly basis until age 13 years, and on a monthly basis thereafter [Camp et al 2014]. Care must be taken to avoid long periods of low blood Phe concentration, which is also harmful to brain development and function. Monitor blood Phe consistently, preferably two to three hours after eating. Evaluate individual nutritional needs, ability to adhere to recommendations, and access to treatment options when choosing appropriate interventions (medical food, modified low-protein food, large neutral amino acids [LNAAs], and sapropterin) to achieve blood PHE in the target range. Include breast milk [Vockley et al 2014] and/or infant formula as sources of Phe in the diet of an infant with PAH deficiency. Recommend that medical food be consumed throughout the day for optimal metabolic control. Track Phe intake by any of several methods, including counting milligrams or exchanges of PHE or grams of protein. Maintain blood Tyr in the normal range. Maintain other nutrients and micronutrients at RDA levels, including calcium, vitamin D, iron, and B vitamins. Due to the protein-restricted dietary components, micronutrients found in animal products must be carefully monitored and supplemented, as needed. Provide counseling and education specific to the needs of the individual with PAH deficiency (and/or his/her caregivers) to help maintain appropriate blood Phe throughout the life span. Sapropterin (Kuvan®). BH4 responsiveness, as determined by a 30% decrease in Phe plasma levels on plasma amino acid analysis, is determined based on response to a pharmacologic dose of BH4 (10-20 mg/kg per day): All affected individuals except those with two trans pathogenic null variants should ideally undergo a trial with sapropterin supplementation. The trial needs to be conducted when Phe levels have been stable and dietary intake can remain unchanged, so that any change in Phe level is the result of the medication; for some affected individuals it is a challenge to conduct a trial of therapy. The most common dose given is 20 mg/kg per day. Lower trial doses may lead to false negative responsiveness results [Vockley et al 2014]. Affected individuals who are responsive should continue this medication with compensatory dietary Phe liberalization, as needed, to maintain a safe Phe level between 120 and 360 μmol/L. The majority of individuals with mild or moderate PKU may be responsive to sapropterin while up to 10% of individuals with classic PKU show a response [Bernegger & Blau 2002, Pérez-Dueñas et al 2004, Zurflüh et al 2006]. Reviewed in Ho & Christodoulou [2014]. Click here (pdf) for more information on the proposed mechanism of action of sapropterin. Large neutral amino acids (LNAA) transporters. LNAA may decrease the plasma Phe concentration in affected adolescents and adults; however, it should not be used in women of child-bearing age (see Pregnancy Management). Click here (pdf) for more information on the proposed mechanism of action of LNAA

Treatment for Non-Classic Hyperphenylalaninemia

While debate continues, many experts believe that dietary treatment is unnecessary for many of the individuals in this class. Individuals with Phe levels >600 μmol/L (10 mg/dL) are treated by most centers, in recognition of the finding of head MRI changes and neuropsychological findings in at least some affected individuals. Treatment in individuals with Phe levels consistently <600 μmol/L but >360 μmol/L remains controversial [Weglage et al 2001, Hanley 2011, van Spronsen 2011]. Thirty-one individuals with PAH deficiency who were never treated and whose plasma Phe concentrations did not exceed 600 µmol/L had normal cognitive neuropsychological development. The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines on the diagnosis and management of PAH (PKU) state: “…treatment of infants with sustained blood Phe levels >360 µmol/L is recommended following appropriate review of the controversy with patients.” If the Phe levels remain between 120 and 360 µmol/L, treatment is not recommended; however, children should be followed for plasma Phe levels closely during the first two years of life, then on an annual or biennial basis [Vockley et al 2014]. Care should be taken so that women of childbearing age in this group receive proper counseling about the teratogenic effects of elevated maternal plasma Phe concentration (i.e., ‘maternal HPA/PKU’) on the developing fetus [Weglage et al 2001] (see Pregnancy Management).

Other

Neuropsychiatric testing may be considered to identify learning differences. Referral to appropriate developmental services is indicated to optimize developmental outcome. Bone health assessment. Current literature regarding the utility of DEXA scans is controversial; however, bone health should be considered in the overall health of an affected individual [Coakley et al 2016].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

See Treatment of Manifestations.

Surveillance

Plasma Phe and Tyr concentrations in individuals with classic PKU must be monitored regularly [National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Panel 2001] (see Treatment of Manifestations). In infants, frequent in-clinic visits are recommended until Phe levels are stabilized, followed by weekly blood level monitoring of Phe and tyrosine levels until age one with closer monitoring during periods of rapid growth or diet transitions. In addition, plasma amino acid levels should be regularly monitored to foster optimal growth during the first year of life. Between ages one and 12 years, biweekly to monthly sampling may be adequate. In adolescents and adults who are stable and well controlled, blood level monitoring can be monthly. Nutritional assessment should include growth evaluation and assessment of micronutrient intake and needs. Some clinics perform monitoring of plasma amino acids, transthyretin, complete blood count, ferritin, and 25-OH vitamin D every six months in infants and annually thereafter even if growth is appropriate and analysis of the diet shows adequate intake. If there is evidence for suboptimal dietary intake or over-reliance on nutritionally incomplete medical foods, evaluation of plasma amino acids (full panel), transthyretin, albumin, complete blood count, ferritin, 25-OH vitamin D, electrolytes, renal function, liver function, albumin, vitamin B12, red blood cell essential fatty acids, trace minerals (zinc, copper, selenium), vitamin A, and folic acid should be considered [Singh et al 2014, Vockley et al 2014]. Assessment of developmental milestones and overall developmental progress should take place at every visit. Screening for mental illness should be considered at every visit and performed at regular intervals by primary care providers.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Aspartame, an artificial sweetener in widespread use, contains phenylalanine. Persons with PKU should either avoid products containing aspartame or calculate intake of Phe and adapt diet components accordingly.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment. Note: Because phenotypic variability may be significant, previously undiagnosed and even apparently asymptomatic sibs of an affected individual may also be affected [Vockley et al 2014]. Evaluations can include: Measurement of blood concentration of phenylalanine and newborn screening in newborn sibs of an individual with PKU if prenatal testing was not done; Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known; Blood concentration of phenylalanine and tyrosine to clarify the disease status of older at-risk sibs if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Women with PAH Deficiency

Women with PAH deficiency who have received appropriate treatment throughout childhood and adolescence have normal physical and essentially normal intellectual and behavioral development. However, if the woman has elevated plasma Phe concentrations during pregnancy, the fetus is at high risk for malformations and intellectual disability, since phenylalanine is a potent teratogen (see Clinical Characteristics) [Rouse & Azen 2004, Prick et al 2012]. The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology Committee Opinion on the Management of Women with Phenylketonuria, the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines on the diagnosis and management of PAH deficiency [Vockley et al 2014], and Singh et al [2014] suggest the following management of an affected woman prior to and during pregnancy. 
Preconception Genetic counseling regarding the teratogenic effects of elevated maternal Phe concentration on the developing fetus and recurrence risks for PAH deficiency in the fetus Achievement and maintenance of the maternal Phe concentration at less than 360 µmol/L for three months prior to conception Assessment of early osteopenia risk Discontinuation of LNAA treatment 
During pregnancy Co-monitor in conjunction with practitioners from an experienced metabolic center. Maternal Phe concentration of 120-360 µmol/L during pregnancy is recommended. In unplanned pregnancies, rapid re-initiation of a Phe-restricted diet should be advised based on current knowledge of the fetal risks. Despite limited data, sapropterin supplementation may be appropriate in addition to dietary therapy. Monitor dietary intake of pregnant women with PAH deficiency to ensure nutrient adequacy with proper proportion of protein, fat, and carbohydrates. Evaluate for fetal anomalies by high resolution ultrasound and fetal echocardiogram. 
Post partum Provide coordinated care in the post-partum period Breast feeding may be pursued if the infant does not have PAH deficiency.

Therapies Under Investigation

Although the treatment of PKU with phenylalanine-restricted diets has been hugely successful, the poor palatability of the diet results in poor compliance in adolescence and adulthood. A number of attempts to find other treatment modalities for PKU are ongoing. Enzyme substitution. Under investigation is the administration of the enzyme phenylalanine ammonia lyase (PAL), a plant-derived enzyme that converts phenylalanine to trans-cinnamic acid and ammonia. The version currently under investigation is the PEGylation (conjugation with polyethylene glycol) of PAL, since it has been found to decrease the immune response to PAL [Gámez et al 2005, Sarkissian & Gámez 2005]. Clinical trials with this protected form of injectable enzyme are currently underway. The results of the Phase I trial showed effectiveness by reducing blood Phe by 54% in the participants receiving the highest dose. The Phe level nadir was at six days and response lasted 21 days. Adverse reactions included rash, antibody accumulation to both PAL and the PEGylation component, and injection site reaction [Longo et al 2014]. Cell-directed therapies. Liver repopulation with PAH-expressing cells is being investigated. Hepatocyte transplantation has been successful in animal models and in humans for other liver-based inborn errors of metabolism, such as glycogen storage disorders and urea cycle defects. Research continues to identify the best ways to allow for transferred hepatocytes to have cell growth advantage over native hepatocytes (reviewed in Strisciuglio & Concolino [2014]). Gene therapies. Liver-directed gene therapy does not result in a permanent correction of PAH activity in animal models. Delivery to muscle was successful in increasing conversion of Phe to Tyr in mice [Reviewed in Strisciuglio & Concolino 2014]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.