http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/plosl

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with PLOSL, the following evaluations are appropriate: Radiographs of the bones of wrists, hands, ankles, and feet to determine the extent of osseous manifestations of the disease Brain CT and/or MRI to determine the extent of CNS manifestations Neurologic and neuropsychological examination to establish the extent of neurologic impairment and cognitive disturbance Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Only symptomatic treatment is available. Relief of pain after curettage and iliac bone grafting of painful lesions in the talus has been reported [Arıkan et al 2014]. Supportive orthopedic devices may be of value in individual cases. The fractures have been reported to heal well [Paloneva et al 2001]. Epileptic seizures may worsen the individual's condition. Consequently, adequate antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) are important.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease is known.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Social problems (unemployment, divorce, financial troubles, and alcoholism) and suicidal tendency are often associated with the progression of the disease [Ilonen et al 2012]. Some of the social consequences may be avoided if family members are informed early about the nature of the disorder [Hakola 1990b].

Surveillance

The interval of surveillance for bone lesions and neurologic and psychiatric manifestations must be determined individually.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Calcium substitution alone has been shown to be ineffective in preventing the development of the osseous manifestations. The effect of bisphosphonates has not been studied. It has been speculated that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) could slow the progression of PLOSL; however, clinical trials have not been performed. A single individual with PLOSL improved temporarily when taking donepezil [D Hemelsoet, personal observation]. Clinical trials in a series of individuals with PLOSL have not been reported.