

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with PLP1-related disorders, the following evaluations are recommended: Physical examination to determine extent and severity of respiratory and feeding difficulties, weakness, hypotonia, spasticity, scoliosis, ataxia, visual impairment, cognitive impairment, contractures, joint dislocations, and ambulation In infants and children, developmental assessment to determine capabilities and needs for cognitive, physical, and other symptomatic therapies Brain MRI (more helpful age ≥9 months) to determine severity of myelination abnormalities; in older children and adults, magnetic resonance spectroscopy to ascertain axonal dysfunction Assessment of peripheral nerve function using NCV to presumptively identify individuals with the PLP1 null syndrome; probably reliable only after age four years Family history to identify other affected or at-risk individuals Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 A multidisciplinary team comprising specialists in neurology, physical medicine, orthopedics, pulmonary medicine, and gastroenterology is optimal for care. Early attention to swallowing difficulties and airway protection, especially in the most severely affected individuals, is important. Those with severe dysphagia may require feeding by gastrostomy. Seizures are usually restricted to individuals with the most severe (connatal) syndrome and although they may not always be associated with electroencephalographic evidence for epileptiform waveforms, they generally respond to antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as carbamazepine. Spasticity management may include physical therapy and exercises, including regular stretching exercises. Antispasticity medications such as baclofen (including intrathecal administration), diazepam, and tizanidine may be helpful, especially in combination with physical therapy, exercise, orthotics, and other assistive devices. In advanced cases, surgery to release joint contractures may be required. Severe scoliosis may result in pulmonary compromise as well as discomfort, especially with position changes, and necessitate corrective surgery to preserve pulmonary function. Proper seating, especially wheelchair, and physical therapy may reduce or prevent the need for surgery. Specialized schooling arrangements are typically necessary for children with PLP1-related disorders. Developmental assessments can accurately assess a child's capabilities, which may be greater than is apparent because of severe motor deficits. Electronic or other communication devices may facilitate communication especially in children with visual and auditory impairment.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Proper wheelchair seating and physical therapy may help prevent scoliosis. Speech and swallowing evaluations can help prevent or reduce aspiration and identify patients who may need a feeding tube for safer and/or adequate nutrition and hydration.

Surveillance

 Semiannual to annual neurologic and physical medicine evaluation is indicated to monitor developmental progress during childhood and to monitor and treat spasticity and orthopedic complications as needed.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 No specific agents or exposures are known to accelerate the long-term disease course. Elevated body temperature, as with fever, may cause neurologic signs and symptoms to transiently worsen, as occurs in individuals with multiple sclerosis (Uthoff phenomenon).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 CNS stem cells were recently transplanted into brains of individuals with PMD in a US FDA-approved Phase I trial [Gupta et al 2012]. The procedure was well tolerated and myelination was noted in the transplanted regions. Pharmacologic agents that lower expression of PLP1 should be of theoretic benefit in individuals with extra copies of PLP1, and those with severe single-nucleotide variants. Preclinical studies are underway to test drugs of this type. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 No controlled studies, either successful or unsuccessful, have been reported for therapy of PMD or SPG2.