

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a PNPLA6-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended: MRI of the cerebrum (including the pituitary), cerebellum, and spinal cord (including the thoracic cord) to establish the extent of atrophy in the different brain regions and exclude other secondary causes for the clinical features Nerve conduction studies and EMG to determine the presence and extent of peripheral neuropathy Neuropsychological investigation, including IQ, attention span, visuospatial abilities, and recall If not performed at the time of diagnosis, ophthalmologic assessment, including visual acuity, visual field testing, fundoscopy, and optic coherence tomography (OCT) [Synofzik et al 2015]. OCT can detect thinning of the retina, loss of layered retinal architecture, and effacement of the choriocapillaris and choroidal vessels. Autofluorescence photographs and fluorescein angiography provide supplementary diagnostic information by revealing hyper- and hypofluorescent regions of abnormal retinal pigment epithelium and the choriocapillaris. If not performed at the time of diagnosis, endocrinologic assessment for evidence of hypothyroidism, growth hormone deficiency, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is detected by decreased rise of gonadotropin levels (LH, FSH) in response to gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH). (See Isolated Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone Deficiency for more details about evaluation.) Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 No disease-modifying drug treatment exists for PNPLA6-related disorders. Given the great phenotypic variability and broad spectrum of the disorders, management of symptoms must be individually tailored. Ataxia. Management should be directed to providing continuous training in the form of active speech, fine-motor, and gait exercises [Fonteyn et al 2014, Ilg et al 2014, Synofzik & Ilg 2014]: Daily regimen with physiotherapy exercises focusing on active, physically demanding tasks [Ilg et al 2009, Ilg et al 2010] Videogame-based whole-body training (“exergames”) with specific videogames aiming to improve coordination and rapid adaptation to changing environments [Ilg et al 2012, Synofzik et al 2013b] Speech therapy [Sapir et al 2003] Swallowing therapy Spasticity. Management should be directed to improving balance, strength, and agility: Daily regimen with physiotherapy exercises focusing on improving muscle strength and gait and reducing spasticity Assistive walking devices and ankle-foot orthotics Drugs to reduce muscle spasticity (e.g., baclofen [oral or intrathecal], tolperison; Botox® injections) and urinary urgency (e.g., oxybutynin) Visual impairment. Low vision aids such as magnifiers may facilitate reading for individuals with reduced central acuity. In the US, publicly funded agencies for the visually impaired at the state level provide services for the blind or those with progressive eye disorders; services include vocational training, mobility training, and skills for independent living. Hypothyroidism. Hypothyroidism is treated with thyroid hormone replacement (e.g., levothyroxine) at the time of diagnosis. Thyroid hormone levels should be normalized by replacement therapy and monitored by an endocrinologist. Growth hormone deficiency. Growth hormone deficiency is treated with hormone replacement therapy and monitored by an endocrinologist. Hypogonadism. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is treated with hormone replacement therapy, often including gonadotropins, at the expected time of puberty. (See Isolated Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) Deficiency) for more details about treatment.)

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Daily physical therapy is recommended to maintain and improve coordination, muscle strength, and gait; reduce spasticity; and prevent contractures.

Surveillance

 Patients should be evaluated periodically (annually or as needed) by a neurologist, ophthalmologist and, if necessary, endocrinologist to assess progression and develop treatment strategies.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Alcohol Obesity Inactive, sedentary lifestyle Exposure to medications or chemicals that exacerbate neuropathy. See Medications Potentially Toxic to Persons with CMT (or Related) Neuropathy (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Anecdotally, ataxia may sometimes appear for the first time or worsen during pregnancy. Note: While some individuals with ataxia report a worsening of coordination after general anesthesia, no increased risk has been reported specifically with obstetric anesthesia. Spasticity generally does not change significantly with pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.