

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with a POLR3-related leukodystrophy, the following are recommended: Pediatric neurology consultation Swallowing assessment Physiotherapy evaluation Occupational therapy evaluation Speech and language pathology assessment Rehabilitation physician (i.e., physiatrist) consultation Neuropsychology evaluation Brain MRI, if not performed at the time of diagnosis Dentistry consultation Endocrine consultation Ophthalmologic evaluation Ear-nose-and-throat specialist consultation for hypersalivation and swallowing issues Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Individualized care by a multidisciplinary team including a pediatric neurologist, clinical geneticist, physiotherapist, occupational therapist, speech and language pathologist, neuropsychologist, rehabilitation physician, dentist, endocrinologist, ophthalmologist, ear-nose-and-throat specialist, and primary care physician is recommended. Manifestations such as ambulation difficulties and seizures are managed in a routine manner. Special caution needs to be taken when managing dysphagia in this disorder as it is known to be quite variable, even in a single day. This is probably due to the prominent cerebellar involvement, leading to more incoordination of swallowing with fatigue, but also with some unpredictability. Dysphagia management is therefore important. Swallowing difficulties will progress over time and individuals may require gastrostomy to manage nutrition. Spasticity and dystonia should be monitored and treated to prevent complications and to improve the quality of life. Hypersalivation is managed with the multidisciplinary team and an otolaryngologist. Treatment must be individualized. Therapies to consider include rehabilitation (e.g., oromotor therapy, behavioral therapy); medical therapy (e.g., anticholinergic medications, botulinum toxin injections); and, in severe cases, surgery (e.g., relocation of the parotid ducts and relocation of the submandibular ducts with or without sublingual gland excision). Learning difficulties are likely to progress slowly. The cognitive involvement is typically much less severe than the motor involvement. In contrast, activities of daily living are likely to become problematic early on in the disease course as motor difficulties make patients progressively more dependent on assistance from others. Dental manifestations should be managed, when necessary, by a dentist and/or orthodontist. Patients should be followed regularly by an endocrinologist. The decision to treat sex and growth hormone deficiency, when present, should be made on an individual basis. Patients need to be followed regularly by an ophthalmologist. A significant proportion of patients will have progressive myopia over several years, which will become severe before stabilizing.

Surveillance

 No general surveillance guidelines have been developed to date; monitoring should be individualized.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Foods that are likely to lead to choking Medications acting on D2 receptor blockers (e.g., neuroleptics such as haloperidol or risperidone, anti-nauseous medications such as metoclopramide) as these can exacerbate the extrapyramidal features

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.