http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pomc-def

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with proopiomelanocortin (POMC) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

For adrenal insufficiency as a result of ACTH deficiency: 9 am plasma cortisol; plasma ACTH concentration; ACTH stimulation test

For central hypothyroidism: TRH test, serum TSH, total T4

For adolescent-onset growth hormone (GH) deficiency: insulin tolerance test and serum IGF-1 levels

For adolescent-onset hypogonadism: FSH, LH, testosterone and/or estradiol

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



The main treatment for POMC deficiency is hormone replacement therapy with glucocorticoids with other hormones as required, as well as skin care in the sun.

Adrenal insufficiency. Adrenal insufficiency is treated in the usual manner with hydrocortisone replacement therapy. Care by a pediatric endocrinologist is recommended.

Severe obesity. Hyperphagic obesity is recognized in the neonatal period and persists into adolescence and adulthood. At present, there is no recognized effective medical therapy to prevent weight gain; therefore, lifestyle measures should be instigated.

Fair skin. The individual may need appropriate verbal and written sun care advice (avoidance of sun exposure in the middle 4 hours of the day [i.e., 10 am - 2 pm], cover-up clothing, high-factor sunscreen). Discussion about the potential lifelong risk for skin cancer is recommended.

Hypothyroidism. The mild central hypothyroidism reported in POMC deficiency is treated with levothyroxine. Importantly, thyroid hormone replacement should not be initiated until adrenal function has been evaluated and adrenal insufficiency (if present) has been treated. Care by a pediatric endocrinologist is recommended.

Growth hormone (GH) deficiency. Adolescent-onset GH deficiency (a rare manifestation of POMC deficiency) is treated with daily subcutaneous GH injections. Care by a pediatric endocrinologist is recommended.

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Adolescent-onset hypogonadism (a rare manifestation of POMC deficiency) can be treated with sex hormone replacement. Care by an endocrinologist experienced in treating this disorder is recommended.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Prompt treatment of ACTH, TSH, GH, LH, and FSH deficiency prevents the consequences of these hormone deficiencies.

Surveillance



From the time of diagnosis, annual monitoring for deficiencies of TSH, GH, LH, and FSH is indicated.

Surveillance of skin for premalignant lesions may be necessary depending on latitude and history of sun exposure. Malignant skin lesions have not specifically been reported to be associated with POMC deficiency, though a theoretic risk is assumed to exist.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, prenatal testing can clarify the genetic status of at-risk pregnancies so that glucocorticoid therapy can be initiated as soon as possible after birth in those newborns known to have POMC deficiency.

If POMC deficiency has been previously diagnosed in a family member, and if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known or if prenatal testing has not been performed, it is necessary to evaluate any at-risk newborn (e.g., sibs of a proband) for evidence of adrenal insufficiency and to initiate glucocorticoid therapy as soon as possible if adrenal insufficiency is found.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.