http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/porphyria-ct

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with familial porphyria cutanea tarda (F-PCT), the following evaluations and/or testing for all known susceptibility factors are recommended: Medical history regarding alcohol consumption, tobacco exposure, medication use (estrogens), exposure to hepatotoxins (e.g., hexachlorobenzene) Evaluation for excess hepatic iron Targeted analysis for HFE pathogenic variants (see HFE-related familial hemochromatosis) Evaluation for hepatitis C and/or human immunodeficiency virus infection Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment is highly effective; it should only be initiated after the diagnosis is well established. The mainstays of therapy for PCT are reduction of body iron stores and liver iron content and use of low-dose anti-malarial agents (chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine). Iron reduction. In most centers serial phlebotomy is the preferred mode of reducing body iron stores and liver iron content. Iron chelation therapy (e.g., deferasirox, deferiprone, or desferrioxamine) is less efficient and more costly than therapeutic phlebotomies in reducing iron, but may be considered if the latter is contraindicated [Rocchi et al 1987]. Serum ferritin concentration should be measured before starting phlebotomy treatment. Typically, approximately 450 mL of blood is removed during a therapeutic phlebotomy, usually initially at two-week intervals. Hemoglobin levels (which are generally >10-11 g/dL) are followed as safety (not therapeutic) targets to prevent symptomatic anemia. The therapeutic target is to reduce the serum ferritin concentration to the low-normal range (15-25 ng/mL), which is associated with tissue iron depletion but usually not anemia. Phlebotomy treatment is also guided by plasma (or serum) porphyrin levels, which are more convenient to measure repeatedly than urine porphyrins, and which decrease more slowly than the serum ferritin concentration. Plasma porphyrin levels usually decline from initial concentrations of 10-25 μg/dL to below the upper limit of normal (~1 μg/dL) within weeks after phlebotomies are completed [Rocchi et al 1986, Ratnaike et al 1988]. Development of new skin lesions generally ceases as plasma porphyrin levels become normal; however, therapy should be continued until the serum ferritin concentration has reached the low end of normal. The chronic skin lesions of PCT are slow to resolve, and some chronic scarring may remain indefinitely. After a remission has been achieved, continued phlebotomies are generally not needed unless initial evaluation has determined the presence of HFE-related familial hemochromatosis. For persons with the HFE genotypes p.Cys282Tyr / p.Cys282Tyr or p.Cys282Tyr / p.His63Asp, management guidelines for HFE-related familial hemochromatosis should be followed. Although not essential, adherence to a low-iron diet, especially with restriction of intake of red meat and liver (rich sources of heme iron, which is absorbed better than iron from vegetable sources) is reasonable, especially in those with HFE pathogenic variants. In addition, the ingestion of tea with lunch or dinner further reduces the gastrointestinal absorption of iron. Note: Treatment of PCT in persons with end-stage renal disease is more difficult since the option for phlebotomy is often limited by anemia. However, in several instances erythropoietin therapy has been shown to correct anemia, mobilize iron, and support phlebotomy [Shieh et al 2000]. Such individuals may also be considered for iron chelation therapy. Low-dose anti-malarial agents. A low-dose regimen of twice-weekly hydroxychloroquine (100 mg) or chloroquine (125 mg) is also effective and most appropriate when phlebotomy is contraindicated or poorly tolerated [Bruce & Ahmed 1998]. Note: Chloroquine is not recommended in persons with increased serum ferritin concentration [Stölzel et al 2003]. Although the use of low-dose anti-malarial agents is preferred at many centers because they are less costly and more convenient, these agents do not deplete hepatic iron and the mechanism of their action in the treatment of PCT is not fully understood. Combining both treatment modalities (i.e., anti-malarial agent therapy and phlebotomy) may be beneficial if the individual is unable to tolerate full courses of phlebotomy. Other. Individuals are advised to stop drinking alcohol and smoking and to discontinue further oral estrogen use. Adequate intake of ascorbic acid and other nutrients may be recommended although this is not considered to be primary therapy. PCT may also improve after treatment of coexisting hepatitis C. PCT should be treated first in most individuals: PCT generally causes more symptoms and can be treated more quickly and effectively than hepatitis C. Some evidence shows that hepatitis C treatment may be more effective after iron reduction [Desai et al 2012, Ryan Caballes et al 2012]. Both interferon and ribavirin (used in the treatment of hepatitis C) commonly cause anemia, which usually precludes phlebotomy for PCT. Attainment and maintenance of an iron-reduced state decreases the severity and progression of chronic hepatitis C and probably also reduces the risk of developing hepatocellular carcinoma [Ryan Caballes et al 2012].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Identification and avoidance of susceptibility factors (where applicable) is advised. See Agents/Circumstances to Avoid. Vaccination against hepatitis A and B is appropriate.

Surveillance

It is advisable to follow porphyrin levels annually and resume phlebotomies (see Treatment of Manifestations) if porphyrin levels begin to rise in the presence of cutaneous signs. Note: Increase in urinary total porphyrins may also be caused by an increase in coproporphyrin (which is of no relevance with regard to the PCT); thus, when levels are only moderately increased, urinary porphyrin fractionation should be performed. Because of reports of an association between diabetes mellitus and PCT [Muñoz-Santos et al 2011], annual screening with a fasting glucose level is recommended, particularly in those with hypertension (BP >135/80 mm Hg). Hepatocellular cancer (HCC) surveillance relies on a combination of serum AFP determinations and hepatic ultrasonography. No guidelines as to the frequency of these tests are currently available due to the rarity of PCT and even rarer occurrence of HCC. Surveillance is usually performed annually; however, in those with advanced chronic hepatitis C and/or alcoholic cirrhosis, hepatologists generally agree that surveillance for HCC should be at least every six months.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following: Susceptibility factors (if known) (e.g., iron supplements, alcohol consumption, smoking, oral estrogen use, and hepatotoxins such as hexachlorobenzene) Exposure to sunlight in symptomatic phase

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Testing at-risk relatives of an individual with F-PCT to identify those with a UROD pathogenic variant is not expected to alter their management due to the low risk of development of the signs and symptoms of PCT. Nevertheless, if the family-specific UROD pathogenic variant is known, it is reasonable to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives so that those with a UROD pathogenic variant can avoid known susceptibility factors. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Pregnancy is generally not complicated by F-PCT. Women with active F-PCT should be able to carry pregnancies to term [Aziz Ibrahim & Esen 2004, Tollanes et al 2011]. It is recommended that women with F-PCT be treated prior to the onset of planned pregnancies.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.