http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/potocki-lupski

Management



Evaluations and Referrals Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Potocki-Lupski syndrome (PTLS), the evaluations and referrals summarized in Table 2 (if not performed as part of the evaluation that led to diagnosis) are recommended. Note: Some evaluations are age dependent and may not be relevant at the time of initial diagnosis (e.g., recommendation for cognitive testing for intellectual disability during infancy).


Table 2. 

Recommended Evaluations and Referrals Following Initial Diagnosis of Potocki-Lupski Syndrome




System
Evaluation
Comment





Growth

Growth assessment for evidence of failure to thrive/short stature
For failure to thrive or poor weight gain: feeding evaluation w/swallow function study to assess for oropharyngeal dysphagiaFor short stature: bone age, IGF-1, IGFBP-3, referral to endocrinologist




Eyes

Ophthalmologic evaluation for strabismus & refractive errors




ENT / Dental

Audiology evaluation & assessment for sleep apnea
Sleep study if sleep apnea is suspected


Evaluation for dental crowding and/or malocclusion




Cardiovascular

ECG & echocardiogram, incl aortic root measurements




Gastroenterology / Nutrition

If failure to thrive is present




Genitourinary

Renal ultrasound to evaluate for structural anomalies




Musculoskeletal

Clinical evaluation for hypermobility, scoliosis, clubbed feet, & pes planus
Radiographic scoliosis survey (x-rays of spine) based on clinical suspicion



Endocrine

Assessment for history of hypoglycemia and/or concern for growth hormone deficiency




Developmental / Psychiatric

Clinical screening for developmental delay, atypical behavior, inattention, hyperactivity & ASD
Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule™ (ADOS™) to aid in diagnosis of ASD



Medical genetics

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor






ASD = autism spectrum disorder

Recommended Evaluations and Referrals Following Initial Diagnosis of Potocki-Lupski Syndrome For failure to thrive or poor weight gain: feeding evaluation w/swallow function study to assess for oropharyngeal dysphagia For short stature: bone age, IGF-1, IGFBP-3, referral to endocrinologist ASD = autism spectrum disorder

Treatment of Manifestations

Depending on the age and presenting problems of the individual with PTLS, a multidisciplinary evaluation involving healthcare providers from the following specialties is often necessary: audiology, cardiology, dental, developmental pediatrics, endocrinology, feeding, gastroenterology, general pediatrics, clinical genetics, ophthalmology, orthopedics, otolaryngology, physical medicine and rehabilitation, psychiatry, sleep medicine, speech pathology, and urology.


Table 3. 

Treatment of Medical Manifestations in Individuals with PTLS




Manifestation
Treatment
Considerations/Other




Strabismus and/or refractive errors
Standard treatment as recommended by ophthalmologist



Dental crowding / malocclusion
Standard treatment as recommended by dentist/orthodontist



Evidence of sleep apnea
Standard treatment as indicated
Assess for iron deficiency if excessive periodic limb movements are identified on sleep study.


Poor weight gain / failure to thrive
Feeding tube in the short term if required for nutrition & growth
Diet diary & calorie counts may be requested.


Hypoglycemia, short stature, evidence of growth hormone deficiency
Standard treatment(s) as recommended by endocrinologist



Cardiac anomaly, dilated aortic root/aortopathy, and/or ECG abnormality
Standard treatment as recommended by cardiologist



Renal anomaly and/or vesicoureteral reflux
Standard treatment as recommended by nephrologist/urologist

Treatment of Medical Manifestations in Individuals with PTLS

Global Developmental Delay / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay/intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country. Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a nationwide federally funded program available in all states. Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. A “full individual evaluation” (FIE) will occur before placement to determine needed services and therapies and will be subsequently integrated into an individualized education plan (IEP). 
Ages 5-21 years In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district generally until age 21. Discussion about transition plans including medical and financial guardianship, financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood. All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life and integration into community. Some issues to consider: Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician. In the United States: Enrollment in DDA (Developmental Disabilities Administration) is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities. Families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction


Gross motor dysfunction Physical therapy is recommended to maximize strength and mobility and to reduce the risk for later-onset orthopedic complications (e.g., scoliosis). Aquatic therapy and hippotherapy (therapeutic horseback riding) may also be considered. Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., orthotics, adaptive strollers). Physical medicine and rehabilitation evaluations may be warranted [Neira-Fresneda & Potocki 2015]. Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended to address difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function such as feeding, grooming, dressing, and handwriting. Oral motor dysfunction. Feeding therapy, typically from an occupational or speech therapist, is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control and/or sensory aversions, assuming the individual is safe to eat by mouth. Communication issues. Consider: Speech and language therapy to address receptive and expressive language deficits, articulation abnormalities, and verbal apraxia; Evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.

Social/Behavioral Difficulties

Children may qualify for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of autism spectrum disorder, including applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA therapy is individualized to the child’s behavioral, social, and adaptive strengths and weaknesses and is typically performed one on one with a board-certified behavior analyst. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician may be helpful in guiding parents through appropriate behavioral management strategies or providing prescription medications when necessary.

Surveillance




Table 4. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with PTLS




System
Evaluation
Frequency
Comments





Growth

Monitoring for growth deceleration, short stature, failure to thrive
At every visit
For failure to thrive or poor weight gain: feeding evaluationFor short stature: consider endocrinology evaluation.




Eyes

Ophthalmology evaluation
Yearly




ENT / Mouth

Audiology evaluation
Newborn hearing screen, then as indicated for speech delay



Dental evaluation
Every 6 months starting in early childhood




Cardiovascular

Echocardiogram w/attention to aortic root dimension & ECG
Every 3 yrs, if initial evaluations were normal; otherwise, as directed by cardiologist




Musculoskeletal

Monitoring for development of scoliosis
Clinical examination at every visit
Scoliosis survey if scoliosis is clinically suspected; referral to orthopedist if indicated



Psychiatric

Behavioral assessment
Screen for behavior problems at every visit; consultation w/psychiatrist and/or psychologist if behavioral atypia present
Autism Diagnostic Interview (ADI) and Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS), depending on age, for those with suspected autism



Miscellaneous / Other

Developmental monitoring by a developmental specialist
Annually, or at frequency directed by developmental specialist
A developmental pediatrician can perform a comprehensive evaluation w/attention to underlying medical factors influencing developmental abilities.A child psychologist can assess cognitive & behavioral issues.

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with PTLS For failure to thrive or poor weight gain: feeding evaluation For short stature: consider endocrinology evaluation. A developmental pediatrician can perform a comprehensive evaluation w/attention to underlying medical factors influencing developmental abilities. A child psychologist can assess cognitive & behavioral issues.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.