

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 For an individual diagnosed with a DICER1-related disorder, the two considerations for evaluations following initial diagnosis are: The extent of disease spread (staging) for malignant or potentially malignant DICER1-related disorders; The presence of other synchronous DICER1-related conditions.

Extent of Disease Spread (Staging)

 Pleuropulmonary blastoma types I and IR. No metastatic potential is associated with this type; thus, the only additional evaluation is for synchronous DICER1-related disorders (see Surveillance). 
              Pleuropulmonary blastoma types II and III
             Brain MRI to evaluate for metastatic disease Radionuclide bone scan to evaluate for metastatic disease, followed by plain radiographs for areas of concern PET scan for diagnosis of solid or cystic and solid tumors, response to therapy, and follow-up. Note, however, that its use has not been validated in PPB. Echocardiography as needed to define intracardiac extension of tumor, tumor thrombi, or pericardial effusion Rarely, spine MRI for a paraspinal or intraspinal extension In the event of systemic embolization and any suggestion of vascular involvement (facial plethora, vena cava syndrome, cardiac murmur): investigation with vascular ultrasound examination CT of the abdomen to assess for liver metastases Note: Bone marrow evaluation is almost never performed, as bone marrow involvement is extremely rare. 
              Ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors
             Intraoperative staging should be performed according to FIGO staging criteria and should include peritoneal cytology and assessment of preoperative or intraoperative rupture. Care should be taken to avoid rupturing the tumor if possible. Spread of ovarian stromal tumors to the chest without extensive abdominopelvic disease is unlikely; however, baseline evaluation with chest CT is reasonable given the concern for synchronous conditions. Ciliary body medulloepithelioma. Staging includes brain MRI to evaluate for direct intracranial extension and metastatic disease. Botryoid-type embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS) of the cervix or other sites. Staging includes MRI or CT to evaluate extent of primary tumor and for presence of metastatic disease in lymph nodes, liver, and lungs. Pituitary blastoma. Staging includes brain and spine MRI, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cytology examination. Pineoblastoma. Staging includes brain and spine MRI, and CSF cytology examination.

Evaluations for Synchronous 

 One or more of the disorders associated with a heterozygous DICER1 germline pathogenic variant may be present at the time of diagnosis or they may develop later in life. Evaluations to be performed for individuals newly diagnosed with a heterozygous DICER1 germline pathogenic variant are included in Surveillance.

Treatment of Manifestations



Pleuropulmonary Blastoma (PPB)

 Surgical management. Treatment for all types is complete surgical resection when feasible. Chemotherapy is recommended in all cases of types II and III PPB utilizing aggressive sarcoma-based regimens; for type I less aggressive regimens can be used based on extent of resection and disease. Type I PPB is treated with complete surgical removal with or without adjuvant chemotherapy. The long-term survival for this subgroup is over 94%; the only deaths are following progression to type II or III [Messinger et al 2012]. Types II and III PPB are treated with aggressive surgical resection and intensive chemotherapy; survival rates at ten years are 62% for type II and 46% for type III [Williams et al 2012]. Complete resection of PPB is recommended by physicians associated with the International PPB Registry (IPPBR). For cystic and solid or purely solid tumors, primary resection is preferred, but adequate biopsy followed by neoadjuvant chemotherapy and delayed complete resection is acceptable. Surgical removal of every cyst may not be possible when cysts are extensive. Primary resection of tumors that are cystic and solid or purely solid should be performed with care so as not to disrupt the tumor or induce tumor spill, similar to the care taken with removal of Wilms tumor. Since solid components of PPB are very friable, piecemeal removal and spill are often inevitable. If it is evident at the time of surgery that the tumor has spread to the chest wall, pericardium, and/ or diaphragm, removal of all grossly visible tumor is recommended. Sites of unresectable residual disease may be titanium clipped for radiographic localization and possible radiotherapy. Involvement of the diaphragm may require excision of a portion of the diaphragm and use of a Gortex patch. Delayed resection after chemotherapy is performed for tumors deemed unresectable at the time of diagnosis. Individuals receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy may have marked tumor reduction; however, this response may be transient and tumor can recur rapidly. Chemotherapy alone is insufficient to eradicate solid PPB. The IPPBR physicians recommend that surgical resection occur no later than after the third cycle of chemotherapy. As with primary surgery, removal of all sites of gross disease should be attempted if possible. If gross-total resection is not achieved, additional surgery may be required for local control. Pleural effusions. Drainage of pleural effusions should be approached with caution. Solid tumors often invade the chest wall obliterating the pleural space. Proper placement of needle and catheter can be difficult without radiographic guidance. Surgery for metastases. Brain parenchyma is the most common metastatic site for PPB. Resection is strongly suggested for intracranial mass lesion(s). Several patients in whom cerebral PPB metastases have been resected have had durable, non-relapse survival [Priest et al 2007]. Therapeutic resection of bone and liver metastases is rarely indicated. 
              Chemotherapy
             Type I PPB. Use of chemotherapy is controversial [Priest et al 2006, Messinger et al 2012]. Types II and III PPB. Aggressive chemotherapy is necessary. Chemotherapy regimens are typically based on other childhood sarcoma regimens with the inclusion of vincristine, actinomycin-D, cyclophosphamide or ifosfamide, and doxorubicin. Agents that have been used with limited success include etoposide and cisplatin or carboplatin. The IPPBR is currently conducting the first prospective clinical study of an aggressive multi-agent chemotherapy; specifics are available at the IPPBR Web site (www.ppbregistry.org). Radiation therapy. Radiation therapy is used primarily to treat PPB recurrence or metastasis, or in the setting of local control of residual unresectable tumor [Priest et al 1997, Kamenova et al 2006, Indolfi et al 2007, Williams et al 2012]. Radiation therapy of brain metastasis can result in long-term survival for some patients. If radiation therapy is chosen, dosage appropriate for high-grade sarcoma (44 Gy or above) should be used [Indolfi et al 2007]. Treatment failure. Survival after failure of primary therapy for types II and III PPB is poor – 35% at two years and 27.5% at five years, respectively [IPPBR, unpublished data]. Modalities used include surgery, attempted repeat complete resection, and radiation therapy. High-dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation have also been used. Intracavitary 32P and cisplatin have also been used on occasion. Because cases are few and chemotherapy regimens used to treat recurrences have varied, data to support specific treatment recommendations in the setting of recurrent disease are limited.

Ovarian Sex Cord-Stromal Tumors

 Ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors (including Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor, juvenile granulosa cell tumor, and gynandroblastoma) are rare and few studies have focused on clinical variables, treatment, and prognosis. Treatment regimens are based on those used for ovarian germ cell tumors and data are limited [Schneider et al 2002, Schultz et al 2012]. If imaging or laboratory studies suggest the presence of an ovarian tumor, consultation with specialists in surgery/gynecology and oncology is suggested. Surgical resection with staging procedures is usually the initial treatment. Fertility-sparing surgery is recommended for most girls and young women. Most patients undergo unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with sampling of peritoneal fluid and cytologic examination of peritoneal washings. Lymph nodes should be carefully examined intraoperatively and removed if they are clinically concerning. Level of differentiation and stage influence outcome and are critical to determining whether adjuvant therapy is necessary. Effort must be made to avoid rupture of the tumor as this would result in an increased stage for some patients. If rupture occurs, the timing of rupture (preoperative vs. intraoperative rupture) must be carefully documented as this may influence the need for adjuvant therapy. The decision to use adjuvant treatment such as chemotherapy following surgery for SLCT or JGCT is based on histology and stage: Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor. For SLCT stage greater than Ia (including Ic with perioperative or preoperative rupture or poorly differentiated SLCT), adjuvant chemotherapy is sometimes used. Depending on the stage, pathology, and need for fertility preservation, consideration should also be given to additional surgery. When chemotherapy is used, a platinum-based regimen such as cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin (PEB) or cisplatin, etoposide, and ifosfamide (PEI) is often used. Additional regimens more often used in adults may include taxanes or anthracyclines. A Phase II randomized trial is currently open through Gynecology Oncology Group comparing cisplatin, etoposide and bleomycin to carboplatin and paclitaxel.Follow-up monitoring for ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors should include attention to tumor markers and imaging. Imaging with either MRI or ultrasound may be preferred over CT as neither involves ionizing radiation; however, the use of MRI in very young children is limited by the need for sedation. If MRI is used, the radiologist should be notified of the clinical concern for ovarian tumor so that appropriate imaging protocols are used. Juvenile granulosa cell tumor (JGCT). In young children with FIGO Stage Ia JGCT the prognosis is excellent with resection alone. Adjuvant chemotherapy, often given with higher-stage disease, is suggested for stages higher than Ic. The most common regimens in the United States include a platinum analog, generally cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin (PEB) and in Europe cisplatin, etoposide, and ifosfamide (PEI). An individualized approach is needed in the instance of preoperative vs intraoperative tumor rupture. Generally speaking, recurrent JGCT is difficult to treat and the approach is highly individualized. Hyperthermic chemotherapy has been used by some investigators. Although a small number of survivors of advanced or recurrent JGCTs underwent radiation therapy, the use of radiation therapy in the treatment of recurrent ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors is not well defined. Gynandroblastoma. The malignant potential of gynandroblastoma is not yet clear. Most are found in an early stage, and surgical resection has been curative for the majority of the reported cases.

Other Tumors

 
              Cystic nephroma
             Surgery. Treatment consists of surgical resection via partial or full nephrectomy. Surgical removal of every cyst may not be possible for patients with extensive bilateral cysts. Chemotherapy. Although the use of chemotherapy has been considered in rare cases with extensive bilateral disease and continued rapid growth, its efficacy has not been studied. 
              Multinodular goiter (MNG) and thyroid cancer
             Observation with or without biopsy. The approach to preoperative investigation is the same for patients with a sporadic nodule with or without a DICER1 pathogenic variant. See guidelines from the American Thyroid Association (purchase required) or the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists/Associazione Medici Endocrinologi/European Thyroid Association collaborative (available online). Ultrasound examination is used to confirm the nodule and to determine the need for fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNA). In general, FNA is recommended for nodules measuring ≥1 cm. FNAB of smaller nodules should be considered in patients with a history of previous radiation exposure and/or concerning sonographic features, including (but not limited to) microcalcifications and abnormal lymph nodes. FNA results that show benign-appearing follicular cells (including Hürthle cells and/or lymphocytes) indicate (in most cases) nodular hyperplasia, follicular adenoma, or lymphocytic thyroiditis. Continued follow-up care is appropriate in the presence of a stable nodule(s). Surgery is appropriate for symptomatic nodules or nodules with significant growth on serial US examination. If the results of the FNA are positive for papillary thyroid carcinoma, total thyroidectomy is the treatment of choice in patients who are surgical candidates. Radioactive iodine (RAI) is the most effective medical treatment for patients found to have distant (lung) metastasis or persistent disease not amenable to repeat surgery. Ciliary body medulloepithelioma (CBME). The four management options include: Observation. In one patient age nine years with CBME and PPB, the CBME was monitored in six-month intervals over a two-year period by high-resolution imaging and ocular examination. The histology of the CBME was unknown [Priest et al 2011]. Local resection. Small, well-circumscribed (<3 clock hours) tumors may be treated by local resection with preservation of useful vision. However, many of these tumors will progress. In one series of ten individuals with CBME, six were initially treated with local resection, including two who received application of a radioactive plaque. However, in all six, tumor recurred after a mean of 2.5 years. Four required enucleation, one received local cryotherapy, and one needed exenteration and irradiation [Shields et al 1996]. Enucleation. Most CBME have advanced features at diagnosis (friable appearance, a neoplastic cyclitic membrane or adjacent free-floating cysts) that should prompt enucleation. Long-term survival is common after this definitive therapy. Four of the five individuals reported with CBME and PPB underwent enucleation with follow-up ranging from seven months to 44 years [Priest et al 2011, Laird et al 2013]. Orbital exenteration. Although rarely indicated, exenteration (with consideration of adjunct chemotherapy and radiation) is required for a CBME that extends beyond the globe. Although long-term survival has been observed following exenteration, it is generally associated with a poor prognosis [Broughton & Zimmerman 1978]. Botryoid-type embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma of the cervix may not require hysterectomy since these tumors are usually confined to the cervix and typically do not have deep stromal invasion. Local resection followed by chemotherapy appropriate for ERMS is one management approach. On completion of chemotherapy, biopsies are performed to determine if residual viable tumor is present. The decision for additional treatment is based on the results of the post-chemotherapy biopsies and follow-up imaging studies. Nasal chondromesenchymal hamartoma (NCMH). The extent of this tumor is best determined by appropriate imaging studies and is usually managed by surgical resection. When access to the tumor is adequate one approach is endonasal endoscopy with resection. If complete resection is difficult, these tumors can be effectively debulked in most cases; however, complete extirpation is preferred. Pituitary blastoma. All six reported patients with pituitary blastoma had surgical resection of the mass by a variety of approaches [Scheithauer et al 2012]; five had subtotal resection and the sixth had a gross total resection. For adjuvant therapy one patient received “polychemotherapy” and another received temozolomide and 5400 cGy radiation therapy. Normalization of endocrine laboratory values, especially ACTH, is expected post-operatively and is a useful marker of disease activity. Some children have required two surgeries to successfully extirpate the tumor. Pineoblastoma. Immediate management issues may include interventions for obstructive hydrocephalus. MRI of the entire spinal axis is indicated, as is CSF cytology and serum and CSF sampling of germ cell tumor markers (beta-human chorionic gonadotropin, alpha-fetoprotein). Open resection, rather than biopsy, is the treatment of choice for pineoblastoma. An aggressive surgical approach is associated with prolonged survival. Following maximal surgical resection, standard adjuvant therapy includes fractionated radiotherapy (to brain and spine) and chemotherapy [Tate et al 2011].

Surveillance

 No guidelines regarding initial screening evaluations or surveillance of persons with a germline DICER1 pathogenic variant have been established. Based on data from the International PPB Registry (IPPBR) which includes more than 500 persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic DICER1-related disorders, the authors recommend (1) annual physical examination and targeted review of systems, and (2) imaging study type and frequency based on tumor type, patient age, and suspicious clinical findings. PPB. Baseline chest CT to evaluate for lung cysts or tumors in a patient of any age Note: The most critical age group for chest CT is children under age three years, the peak risk age for solid PPB. The negative predictive value of a normal chest CT for development of PPB is not known. 
            CN
           Baseline kidney CT or ultrasound examination in a patient diagnosed with PPB In a patient of any age, especially those younger than age four years, annual abdominal examination and monitoring for abdominal pain, swelling, or hematuriaNote: The negative predictive value of a normal kidney CT or ultrasound examination for development of CN is not known. 
            Thyroid gland neoplasia
           Thyroid physical examination in a patient of any age If thyroid gland asymmetry and/or a nodule are detected, perform thyroid ultrasound examination to confirm as well as to determine if surveillance or fine needle aspiration biopsy is warranted. If no nodules are detected, continue annual physical examination and consider repeat thyroid US every three to five years. Thyroid ultrasound examination if the patient has previously received chemotherapy or as a baseline if chemotherapy is anticipated Thyroid function testing as indicated based on clinical signs and symptoms of hypo- or hyperthyroidism 
            Ovarian stromal tumors
           Examination of all females of any age for signs and symptoms of precocious puberty or virilization, and masses in the abdomen or pelvis. If any are detected, perform appropriate imaging and laboratory evaluations. Imaging: abdominal-pelvic US examination, MRI, or CT Laboratory testing: serum markers AFP, beta-HCG, LDH, inhibin A and B, estradiol, testosterone, CA125, and serum electrolytes including calciumNote: There is no current recommendation for laboratory screening in the absence of a mass or clinical findings of sex hormone excess. For women and the parents of young girls with a DICER1 germline pathogenic variant: education regarding the possible presenting signs and symptoms of ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors (abdominal distension, precocious puberty, amenorrhea, and signs of virilization [hirsutism, voice changes, acne]) 
            CBME
           Evaluation of young children for ciliary body medulloepithelioma including measurement of visual acuity Visual inspection of the eye and orbit Botryoid ERMS. In infants, children, and young adults: when signs/symptoms of hematuria or abnormal vaginal bleeding are present, endoscopic evaluation of the bladder or direct visualization of the cervix, respectively NCMH. In infants, children, adolescents, and adults: Review of systems including respiratory and feeding difficulties, rhinorrhea, epistaxis, visual disturbances, and otitis media Nasal endoscopy as warranted by ophthalmologic signs (e.g., ophthalmoplegia, proptosis, ptosis, hypotropia, and enophthalmos) resulting from orbital involvement of the tumor Pituitary blastoma. Brain MRI for persons with a DICER1 germline pathogenic variant with signs of cortisol excess Pineoblastoma. Brain MRI for persons with a DICER1 germline pathogenic variant with signs of increased intracranial pressure such as headache, full fontanel, vomiting, and lethargy, or other neurologic defects including upgaze paralysis and nystagmus

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 If the germline DICER1 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, it is reasonable to offer molecular genetic testing to at-risk relatives of all ages to clarify their genetic status and to provide recommendations for age-appropriate surveillance and early intervention. If first-degree relatives are not able to undergo molecular genetic testing, surveillance should be based on clinical changes that would warrant further investigation as detailed above (see Surveillance). See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Although large lung cysts in the fetus can theoretically impair lung development, such an occurrence appears to be uncommon. According to the IPPBR, prenatal ultrasound examination has detected lung cysts in seven cases at 31-35 weeks’ gestational age. Because large lung cysts can cause respiratory distress in newborns, it is recommended that prenatal identification of lung cysts prompt consultation with specialists in high-risk obstetrics and fetal medicine to monitor the pregnancy and manage the delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

 The first prospective treatment trial is now open at many institutions in the United States and Europe. For details on study enrollment and institutional approval, see the IPPBR Web site. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.