

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with progressive pseudorheumatoid dysplasia (PPD), the following evaluations are recommended: Complete skeletal survey, if not already done as part of the diagnostic evaluation Referral to a pediatric orthopedic surgeon or specialist in treating bone dysplasias Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor or a multidisciplinary skeletal dysplasia team

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment is supportive. No specific therapy for PPD is available. Pain due to secondary osteoarthritis may respond to NSAIDs. Other anti-inflammatory medications including steroids and immunosuppressive drugs (cyclosporine and methotrexate) have a limited role in treatment and are best avoided in view of their significant side effects. Physical therapy may help preserve joint mobility. Immobilization (e.g., casting) should be avoided. Most joint involvement requires intervention by an orthopedist and/or physical therapist. Angular deformities of lower limbs. The indications for surgical correction are to restore normal alignment of the lower limbs and to alleviate gait disturbance, instability, and/or pain. 
                Progressive joint stiffness Large joint stiffness is managed by physical therapy, activity modification, and walking aids. Small joint arthropathy is managed by an occupational therapist who may advise adaptive devices, modification of activity, and/or vocational training. Joint pain. Severe joint pain due to advanced osteoarthritis is treated by joint arthroplasty (i.e., hip and knee replacement). Early hip replacement (second decade of life) can be successful in relieving pain and restoring the ability to ambulate. 
                Progressive stiffness and deformities of the spine Scoliosis and mild kyphosis can be managed with bracing. Spinal canal stenosis can be managed with decompression, fusion, and instrumentation.

Surveillance

 No specific guidelines for surveillance have been published. Recommendations include the following: Monitoring for orthopedic complications including bone deformity, secondary joint disease, spinal deformities, and pain Evaluation by a specialist in skeletal dysplasia or a multidisciplinary skeletal dysplasia clinic every year

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid immobilization (e.g., casting).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Deformities of pelvis may necessitate delivery by cæsarean section in pregnant women who have PPD.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.