http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/prion

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with genetic prion disease, the following evaluations are recommended: Physical examination with focus on the neurologic features of cognition, motor function, and coordination Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Therapy is aimed at controlling symptoms that may cause discomfort. If present, seizures may be treated with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as diphenylhydantoin or carbamazepine. Myoclonus can sometimes be mitigated by clonazepam. Issues related to dysphagia are often difficult to resolve. Since the disease is terminal, families are often faced with the decision of whether or not to place a permanent feeding tube. The timing of this decision differs depending on the type of prion disease. In general, placement of a feeding tube should be discouraged in those with late-developing dysphagia, as it may make it difficult for families to eventually withdraw feeding. Evaluation by a social worker is mandatory to assist the family in management planning, as many decisions are required during the course of disease and at the end of the disease process. Autopsy to confirm the diagnosis should always be a consideration, as accurate information is important for family members.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Similar to the non-genetic forms of prion disease, some genetic forms of prion disease can also be environmentally transmitted to others. Therefore, caution is advised for any affected individual undergoing a surgical procedure (e.g., endoscopy, brain biopsy): surgical instruments used must be properly decontaminated or discarded to reduce the possibility of transmission of prion disease to other persons.

Surveillance

 Affected individuals are examined at regular intervals for complications related to swallowing difficulties, intercurrent infections, and other disease manifestations.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 There are no known substances that are reported to specifically worsen prion diseases, but as with any dementia, anticholinergics and antihistamines with high anticholinergic potential, should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 No cases of pregnant women affected with prion disease have been documented; if such a situation were to arise, clinical judgment regarding the safety and viability of the fetus and the life expectancy of the mother (which can be estimated based on the pathogenic variant and time of onset of symptoms) should be used in determining the best course of action during the pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

 The drug quinacrine, an antimalarial agent that showed promise in tissue culture, was studied in both the US and the UK as a possible therapy, but in both cases it was found not to significantly affect the progression or symptoms of disease. Several experimental therapies, including antibodies against PrP, gene silencing with RNA inhibitors, and anti-amyloids (such as Anle138b [Wagner et al 2013]) are being tested in animal models. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 The National Prion Disease Surveillance Center is charged with collecting and recording all cases of prion disease in the US. They should be notified regarding all cases of suspected prion disease. Individuals with genetic prion disease do NOT need to be quarantined. While all prion diseases are potentially transmissible through ingestion or injection of infectious tissue (neural), they are not contagious by typical means of close contact with affected individuals. It is advisable, however, that body fluids of symptomatic individuals be handled as biohazard waste. Antiviral therapies have been tested and anecdotal reports do not support them to be efficacious. In rodent studies, amphotericin B, pentosan polysulfate, and various other agents displayed promise when administered prior to infecting animals with prions; however, no successful clinical results have been reported.