

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with prolidase deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended: Review of systems to assess for the possibility of pulmonary complications. In those with a history of pulmonary complications, consider chest imaging, pulmonary function tests, an echocardiogram to assess for pulmonary hypertension, and consultation with a pulmonologist. Physical examination to evaluate for splenomegaly. If present, perform an abdominal ultrasound examination to evaluate the extent of splenomegaly. Complete blood count to evaluate for anemia and thrombocytopenia Liver function tests to assess for the possibility of elevated liver enzymes Developmental assessment Consultation with a wound care specialist Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 No curative treatment is available. Care is preferably provided by a multidisciplinary team. Supportive treatment of skin, lung, and immunologic manifestations has been efficacious in some (but not in all) patients. Caution is warranted in the treatment of infections, which can be fulminant and fatal. Click here (pdf) for further details, including treatments in which only partial or short-term benefit was reported.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Those who have undergone splenectomy should be appropriately immunized and treated promptly with antibiotics at the first sign of infection. Antibiotic prophylaxis should also be considered in the appropriate setting.

Surveillance

 In the absence of formal surveillance guidelines, the authors recommend: Annual: Skin examination for evidence of malignant transformation in persons with chronic recalcitrant skin ulcers Complete blood count Liver function tests Abdominal ultrasound examination to assess liver and spleen size Follow up as recommended by a pulmonologist and immunologist; Follow-up assessments of motor and cognitive development as recommended for educational planning.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Individuals with prolidase deficiency who have splenomegaly should avoid contact sports given the increased risk for splenic rupture.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Adenovirus-mediated gene transfer.
Ikeda et al [1997] performed transfer of the human prolidase cDNA into fibroblasts from patients with prolidase deficiency. This increased the fibroblast prolidase activity up to 75 times normal. Intracellular delivery of liposome-encapsulated prolidase.
Perugini et al [2005] showed that active prolidase encapsulated in liposomes was completely transported via endocytosis into fibroblasts six days after incubation. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.