

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in each individual with newly diagnosed PROP1-related combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD), it is important to evaluate for deficiencies of GH, TSH, LH, FSH, PRL, and ACTH because treatment of one hormone deficiency can precipitate symptoms of another hormone deficiency: A total T4 assay can be used to evaluate thyroid hormone production. Evaluation of LH and FSH production is more relevant in postpubertal individuals, particularly if sexual development is incomplete or if women display hypoestrogenic amenorrhea. AM cortisol can be used to evaluate adrenal hormone production. Medical genetics consultation is appropriate.

Treatment of Manifestations

 The main principle of treatment in CPHD is replacement therapy with the appropriate hormones [Mehta et al 2009]. Growth hormone. GH deficiency is treated by subcutaneous injection of biosynthetic (i.e., recombinant) GH. To obtain an optimal outcome, replacement therapy should be started as soon as the diagnosis of GH deficiency is established. The initial dose of recombinant human GH (rhGH) is based on body weight, but the exact dose and the frequency of administration vary by protocol. The dose increases with increasing body weight to a maximum during puberty and is usually discontinued when final height has been reached, at approximately age 17 years [Ranke 1995, Rosén et al 1995, Growth Hormone Research Society 2000 (full text)]. There is increasing support for the use of rhGH treatment in young adults with GHD as well because of the possible effects on fat metabolism, lean body mass, and bone mineral density [Ho et al 2007 (full text)]. Clinical response to exogenous GH usually depends on the etiology and severity of the GH deficiency, deficiencies of other pituitary hormones, age of onset of growth failure, the time interval between the onset of growth failure and the onset of GH therapy, duration of replacement therapy, and the sex of the affected individual [Blethen et al 1997]. De Ridder et al [2007] developed a model that accurately predicts the adult height that will be achieved by GH therapy. TSH. TSH deficiency is treated by thyroid hormone replacement in the form of L-thyroxine at a dose of approximately 1-3 µg/kg/day given orally. Of note, thyroid hormone replacement should not be initiated until adrenal function has been assessed and adrenal insufficiency is treated if present. 
            LH and FSH
           Male infants with micropenis are treated with 50 mg testosterone enanthate intramuscularly every four weeks for a total of three to four doses. If GH deficiency is present and if the child's growth normalizes before adolescence, it is appropriate to begin sex steroid replacement to induce secondary sex characteristics. In males, this can be initiated at age 12 to 13 years with monthly injections of 100 mg testosterone enanthate, gradually increasing by 50 mg every six months to a dose of 200 to 300 mg per month. In females, this can be initiated at age 11 to 12 years with conjugated estrogens or ethinyl estradiol, eventually cycling with estrogen and progesterone. If the child has untreated growth hormone deficiency, the sex hormone replacement is given in lower doses and started at a later age to ensure maximal growth before epiphyseal closure. Usually sex steroids are used to maintain secondary sex characteristics. Fertility in both females and males is possible with administration of gonadotropins [Voutetakis et al 2004c]. Note: Because infertility in individuals with PROP1-related CPHD is secondary to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, appropriate treatment consists of gonadotropin replacement rather than the use of clomiphene citrate, which requires an intact pituitary gland. ACTH. Long-term management is usually 10-15 mg/M2 oral hydrocortisone per 24 hours divided into three doses. For individuals with GH deficiency, the lowest safe dose of hydrocortisone is used to avoid interfering with the growth response to growth hormone therapy. For minor stress such as fever or minor illness, the dose of hydrocortisone is doubled or tripled until the illness has resolved. For major stress, such as surgery or significant illness, hydrocortisone is increased to 40 to 100 mg/M2 and administered parenterally.

Surveillance

 Growth should be carefully monitored; if growth velocity is low, evaluation for GH deficiency should be undertaken. In persons with PROP1 pathogenic variants without known ACTH deficiency, cortisol levels should be monitored because ACTH deficiency may develop at a later time.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 If both (paternal and maternal) PROP1 pathogenic variants are identified in a proband, it is appropriate to perform molecular genetic testing on younger sibs to enable early diagnosis and treatment. For younger sibs who have not undergone molecular genetic testing, monitoring growth for evidence of growth failure is appropriate. Of note, affected sibs usually have extreme short stature because of thyroid hormone deficiency and growth hormone deficiency. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.