

Management

 The optimal management of patients with propionic acidemia (PA) is best achieved by a team comprising a physician with metabolic expertise, a dietician, and a genetic counselor. Several proposed acute and chronic management guidelines have become available in recent years [Chapman et al 2012, Sutton et al 2012, Baumgartner et al 2014]. Management of symptomatic hyperammonemic patients awaiting confirmatory testing can be particularly challenging and requires pursuit of several diagnostic considerations [Häberle et al 2012]. Also see Table 6 in Baumgartner et al [2014].

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with PA the following evaluations are recommended (see Figure 2): Blood gas with base balance, electrolytes with anion gap, glucose, plasma ammonia, calcium, phosphorus, urine ketones Plasma amino acids, total and free carnitine and acylcarnitine profile, and urine organic acid analysis Complete blood count to evaluate for cytopenias Consider initiating an evaluation for sepsis if the CBC and individual’s clinical signs suggest that infection is likely Amylase and lipase to evaluate for pancreatitis Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor Once the patient becomes stable, evaluations include the following: Clinical assessment of growth parameters, ability to feed, the need for G-tube placement, and neurologic status. Laboratory assessment of nutritional status (calcium, phosphorus, albumin, prealbumin, plasma amino acids, vitamin levels [including thiamine and 25-hydroxyvitamin D], iron panel, and minerals and renal function); complete blood count to monitor for cytopenias Clinical evaluation for cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia with ECG, 24-hour Holter monitor, echocardiogram EEG and brain MRI in symptomatic individuals Developmental evaluation Dilated eye examination Hearing evaluation Immunology consult Other Complete adherence to regional immunization schedules and influenza vaccination is indicated [Baumgartner et al 2014]. Maintain a high index of suspicion for endocrine, immune, and renal problems and address accordingly.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Neonatal/acute decompensation. Birth, infections, trauma, surgery, postpartum recovery, or other forms of stress and hormonal changes can result in a catabolic response that leads, among other things, to protein breakdown with release of propiogenic amino acids that cannot be metabolized in PA. The goal of acute management is to reverse this process through promotion of anabolism and removal of toxic intermediates. The treatment of individuals with acutely decompensated PA is a medical emergency and requires a transfer to a center with biochemical genetics expertise and the ability to support urgent hemodialysis, especially if hyperammonemia is present. 
            In-patient management
           Assess and manage ventilation and circulation as necessary. Treat precipitating factors (fever, infection, dehydration, pain, vomiting, and other sources of stress). Determine the need for sepsis workup and antibiotics. Reverse catabolism by giving intravenous glucose and lipids. The volume, glucose content and electrolyte composition of intravenous fluids is determined by age, target glucose infusion rate, cardiovascular status, renal condition, and co-administration of other medications. Intravenous D10 ½ normal saline typically between 100% and 150% of the maintenance requirements is a common starting fluid. Dextrose solutions exceeding the concentration of 12.5% require a central line placement. The target glucose infusion rates varies by age [Baumgartner et al 2014]. Additional calories can be provided using parenteral lipid emulsion. The use of intravenous insulin drip may be needed to maintain euglycemia and promote anabolism. Manage protein intake to reduce propiogenic precursors; avoidance of protein transiently for <24-36 hours may be required. Transition to enteral feedings should be commenced as soon as they are tolerated (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations, Dietary management). If transition to enteral feedings within 48 hours is not possible, total parenteral nutrition is required. Parenteral amino acid solutions are prescribed based on the recommended daily intake of age-appropriate energy, protein, isoleucine, valine, methionine, and threonine and adjusted using the daily and weekly growth data and plasma amino acid concentrations. Remove toxic compounds. Pharmacologic detoxification: Nitrogen scavenger medications (sodium benzoate, sodium phenylacetate, sodium phenylbutyrate), such as those used in urea cycle disorders to help control ammonia levels during acute decompensations, should be used with caution in the treatment of hyperammonemia associated with PA as they can accentuate frequently observed low plasma glutamine [Al-Hassnan et al 2003, Filipowicz et al 2006]. For a discussion regarding the use of sodium benzoate versus sodium phenylacetate and sodium phenylbutyrate in propionic acidemia see Baumgartner et al [2014]. Oral N-carbamoylglutamate (carglumic acid; 100 mg/kg divided every 6 hours in individuals <20 kg and 2.2 gm/m2 in individuals >20 kg) can aid in the detoxification of ammonia during neonatal and acute decompensations [Filippi et al 2010, Schwahn et al 2010, Chapman et al 2012]. Extracorporeal detoxification is required for persistent acidosis and hyperammonemia (plasma ammonia level >250-300 μmol/L) not responding to fluid and drug treatment. Methods include (depending on age and clinical situation) continuous veno-venous hemofiltration, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, or hemodialysis [Chapman et al 2012, Baumgartner et al 2014]. Carnitine supplementation (100 mg/kg/day IV divided in 3 doses) may enhance the detoxification of propionic acid by conjugating into propionylcarnitine, which is excreted by the kidneys. Alternatively, it may relieve intracellular coenzyme A accretion and provide a benefit through this mechanism. Consult hospital pharmacy for the recommended maximum daily dose in older patients. Manage pancreatitis using standard practices. Home management of metabolic status. The detection and management of metabolic decompensations at home are a critical part of the chronic management of PA. Patients and care providers should notify their medical team about new symptoms and discuss the appropriateness of home management. Strategies to achieve home management should be tailored for the conditions of each patient and family and may include the following: At-home detection and monitoring of urine ketones Diet modification under the direction of the metabolic team If fever is present due to an infection, treatment may include paracetamol and ibuprofen [Baumgartner et al 2014]. Use of anti-emetics such as ondansetron (see precautionary considerations in Agents/Circumstances to Avoid) 
            Other
           Any injury, illness, hospitalization, or surgical procedure should involve consultation with the metabolic team. The diagnosis and management of pancreatitis is the same as for pancreatitis of other causes. Neutropenia and other cytopenias usually improve with metabolic control of PA. Management of arrhythmias is similar to that from other causes. Cardiomyopathy may improve after liver transplantation in some patients [Romano et al 2010]. Seizures are a frequent complication of PA, necessitating an antiepileptic drug. The use of valproic acid in organic acidemias is often avoided; however, several authors described its use in patients with PA [Haberlandt et al 2009, Schreiber et al 2012]. Dermatologic manifestations (e.g., persistent dermatitis or eczema) warrant a nutritional reassessment to rule out dietary deficiency of essential amino acids, essential fatty acids, vitamins, and minerals.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Dietary management. The mainstay nutritional intervention is modification of diet to control the intake of propiogenic substrates (isoleucine, valine, methionine, and threonine), while ensuring normal protein synthesis and preventing protein catabolism, amino acid deficiencies, and growth restriction. Important note: Dietary management needs to be directed by an experienced physician and metabolic dietician. Recommended protein intake depends on age of the patient (see Table 11 in Baumgartner et al [2014]). The ratio of natural source protein to medical foods varies depending on the individual’s clinical status, laboratory parameters, and growth trajectory [Sutton et al 2012]. Laboratory parameters useful in guiding nutritional intervention can include the following: Pre-prandial plasma essential amino acids Plasma albumin Prealbumin Hemoglobin Plasma ammonia Urinary ketones, plasma lactic acid, and methylcitric acid to monitor and adjust nutritional management Plasma vitamin D Essential fatty acid profile Additional calories can be provided using protein-free formulas. G-tube placement is an effective strategy to facilitate the administration of medications and nutrition during acute decompensations and to improve adherence in chronic management of PA. Since the number of acute decompensations negatively correlates with the intellectual quotient in patients with PA [Grünert et al 2012], prevention and proactive management of metabolic crises can be an important point of intervention to maximize favorable clinical outcomes. 
            Medications
           Levocarnitine. The optimal dose of levocarnitine has not been established; doses ranging from 50 to 300 mg/kg per day have been reported [Sutton et al 2012, Baumgartner et al 2014]. When calculating the daily dose of levocarnitine, one needs to consider the presence of this pharmaceutic compound in medical foods and the maximum daily dose in older patients. Levocarnitine can be given enterally and intravenously. Antimicrobial therapy. Oral metronidazole has been shown to reduce propionic acid production by intestinal gut flora [Thompson et al 1990, Mellon et al 2000]. One regimen uses a one-week-on, three-weeks-off approach [Chapman et al 2012, Sutton et al 2012]. Biotin supplementation. There is no consensus regarding the use of biotin supplementation nor the optimal dose in the treatment of PA. Given biotin’s favorable profile, a short therapeutic trial may be considered [Sutton et al 2012, Baumgartner et al 2014]. Whether a biotin-responsive form of PA exists is not known [Baumgartner et al 2014]. Management during episodes of metabolic decompensation includes: Avoidance of fasting (e.g., using intravenous dextrose). Increasing calorie intake to prevent catabolism (e.g., intravenous fat emulsion). When enteral feeding cannot be provided for a prolonged period of time, judicious use of total parenteral nutrition may include standard amino acid mixes providing age-appropriate recommended daily allowance of protein [Sutton et al 2012]. In rare circumstances, specialized amino acid mixes with reduced content of isoleucine, valine, threonine and methionine are necessary. Organ transplantation. Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) may be indicated in those individuals who, despite adequate medical treatment, still experience frequent metabolic decompensations, uncontrollable hyperammonemia, and poor growth [Barshes et al 2006, Charbit-Henrion et al 2015]. Benefits of OLT include decrease in the frequency of metabolic decompensations, improved quality-adjusted life years, increased life expectancy, life-time cost savings [Vara et al 2011, Li et al 2015], and reversal of dilated cardiomyopathy [Yorifuji et al 2004, Romano et al 2010]. Liver transplantation has been performed from unrelated donors [Barshes et al 2006, Romano et al 2010] and from heterozygous related donors [Morioka et al 2005, Vara et al 2011, Kasahara et al 2012]. Continuous hemofiltration, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) [Sato et al 2009, Kasahara et al 2012], and left ventricular assist devices have been used while waiting for OLT [Ameloot et al 2011]. OLT in patients with PA is not curative. It does not completely protect against a metabolic stroke, hyperammonemia, or metabolic decompensations. Life-long post-transplant management is recommended [Yorifuji et al 2004, Vara et al 2011, Kasahara et al 2012]. Continued protein restriction and L-carnitine supplementation after OLT is advocated by several authors [Saudubray et al 1999, Yorifuji et al 2004, Kasahara et al 2012]. Sedation and perioperative management. Anesthetic aspects of perioperative management of patients with PA have been infrequently discussed [Baumgartner et al 2014]. Involvement of a metabolic specialist perioperatively to ensure adequate hydration and caloric management can help minimize the risk of decompensations. Emergency situations. Emergency letters, bracelets, and emergency information in smartphones help facilitate appropriate emergency care by healthcare providers unfamiliar with propionic acidemia.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Regular monitoring by a biochemical geneticist and a dietitian is necessary to avoid insufficient or excessive protein restriction. Many factors should be taken into account to guide protein restriction: age, gender, severity of PA, nutritional status, and presence of other factors such as intercurrent illness, surgery, level of physical activity, and growth spurts. The effects of excessive protein restriction can include impaired growth, essential amino acid deficiencies, and metabolic decompensations. Acrodermatitis enteropathica, hair loss, and cutaneous Candida infections in patients with PA managed with medical foods can be caused by essential amino acid deficiency and require a re-appraisal of the nutritional management. Psychotic episodes in patients with PA have been infrequently reported [Dejean de la Bâtie et al 2014]. Similar to other inborn errors of metabolism, care should be exercised when using antipsychotic medications as they can mask clinical signs of encephalopathy or cause adverse effects.

Surveillance

 The following evaluations are performed at different intervals depending on factors such as age, disease severity, and presence of catabolic stressors; evaluation frequency can range from every three months to annually. Clinical evaluation should include assessment of the following: Linear growth, weight gain, head circumference, and body mass index Interval assessment for the need of G-tube Neurologic evaluation including survey for seizures and movement disorders Interval ophthalmologic evaluation including dilated eye examination Audiology evaluation Evaluation for clinical signs of cardiomyopathy (e.g., tachycardia, tachypnea, shortness of breathy, hepatomegaly) Evaluation of integumentary system (skin, hair, G-tube, and central line insertion sites) Developmental and neurocognitive progress, as age-appropriate Laboratory evaluation should include the following: Metabolic studies: urine organic acids, pre-prandial plasma amino acids (especially, isoleucine, leucine, valine, threonine, and methionine), plasma ammonia concentration, plasma free and total carnitine, and quantitative plasma acylcarnitine profile Nutritional studies: electrolytes, mineral panel, albumin, prealbumin, hemoglobin, vitamin D, iron studies, essential fatty acids, and trace minerals (selenium and zinc) Complete blood count and differential to monitor for cytopenias Renal function tests; serum cystatin C can be more sensitive than plasma creatinine in identifying early evidence of chronic renal failure. Amylase and lipase as needed to evaluate for pancreatitis Other evaluations: Cardiology evaluation, screening for cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias by echocardiogram, ECG, and Holter monitor, annual and as needed Ophthalmologic evaluation to assess optic nerve and retinal changes, annually and as needed DEXA scan Brain MRI, MRS, and EEG as clinically indicated Physical, occupational, and speech therapy services to determine need

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid prolonged fasting, catabolic stressors, and excessive protein intake. Lactated Ringer’s solution is not recommended in patients with organic acidemias. In patients with QT abnormalities, avoid medications that can prolong the QT interval. Ondansetron, an antiemetic drug used to control nausea, has been associated with QT interval prolongation on ECG [Tay et al 2014] and therefore should be used cautiously in patients with PA who have cardiomyopathy and QT interval abnormalities. Neuroleptic antiemetics (e.g., promethazine) can mask symptoms of progressive encephalopathy and are best avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Testing of at-risk sibs is warranted to allow for early diagnosis and treatment. If prenatal testing has not been performed on at-risk sibs, measure urine organic acids, plasma amino acids, and acylcarnitine profile immediately in the newborn period in parallel with newborn screening. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Although successful pregnancy outcomes have been reported in patients with PA [Van Calcar et al 1992, Langendonk et al 2012], pregnancy can pose a significant management challenge. Hyperemesis gravidarum may require the use of an antiemetic but the risk of QT interval prolongation and the effect on the central nervous system need to be considered [Baumgartner et al 2014]. Baseline evaluation and monitoring of cardiomyopathy before, during, and after pregnancy is recommended. Reference ranges for total and free plasma carnitine differ during pregnancy [Schoderbeck et al 1995]. Close nutritional follow up and fetal growth monitoring is necessary as the energy and protein requirements change throughout pregnancy. Close post-partum clinical and biochemical follow up and delayed discharge from the hospital are recommended. In the post-partum period, increased caloric and protein needs during lactation should be taken into consideration.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.