http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/proteus

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Proteus syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended [Tosi et al 2011]:

Detailed and comprehensive (general, spine, and hand) orthopedic evaluation

Skeletal survey as a baseline study of the extent and severity of overgrowth

CT imaging, possibly with three-dimensional reconstruction for patients with significant scoliosis. As the vertebral bodies are commonly progressively deformed, this study can be very helpful for surgical planning.

Pulmonology consultation, pulmonary function testing, and high-resolution computed tomography of the chest for patients with signs or symptoms compatible with bullous pulmonary disease

Other imaging techniques are highly useful and should be determined by manifestations on examination and by the medical history. Computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and ultrasound have been extremely useful in the characterization of this disorder [Jamis-Dow et al 2004].

Treatment of Manifestations



As with any complex and multisystem disorder, patients with PS benefit from a coordinated and multidisciplinary clinical approach tailored to the individual’s specific needs and manifestations.

Overgrowth is an ongoing issue for many patients with Proteus syndrome. The management is complex and highly dependent on the nature of the overgrowth, which can vary substantially among patients.

For overgrowth of tubular bones, epiphysiostasis and epiphysiodesis should be the mainstays of management. One intervention that the authors have found to be detrimental to patients with Proteus syndrome is distraction osteotomy (so-called Ilizarov procedure) performed on the normal (shorter) limbs. Readers are referred to a recent review and conference report for more details on this complex issue [Tosi et al 2011].

The skeletal overgrowth of PS can result in significant biomechanical and functional compromise. Because of this, ongoing and comprehensive Rehabilitation Medicine care, including physical and occupational therapy, is important for many patients. In addition, many patients with PS develop substantial needs for custom-designed footwear or orthotics due to leg-length inequality or plantar CCTNs.

Patients with PS who develop large plantar CCTNs should receive regular dermatologic care and attention to manage malodor (a potential complication of difficulty with cleanliness of the deepening of the sulci in late adolescence) and other concerns, such as pressure ulcerations. Large plantar CCTNs can also contribute to problems with shoe fit and often warrant pedorthic intervention as mentioned above.

Management of the overgrowth of adipose tissue is challenging because the areas of adipose overgrowth are not encapsulated and discrete (in contrast to lipomas) and, therefore, can be difficult to resect and commonly regrow after surgical debulking. The authors generally recommend open surgical approaches over liposuction because the highly vascularized lipomatous overgrowth in some patients can result in hemorrhaging that is difficult to control and/or chronically weeping lymphatics.

Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE). The most urgent and life-threatening complication of Proteus syndrome can be DVT and PE [Slavotinek et al 2000]. The rarity of this problem in the general pediatric population can result in a delay in diagnosis.

The authors recommend emergent evaluation of patients who develop symptoms of DVT (e.g., palpable subcutaneous rope-like mass, swelling, erythema, pain, and distal venous congestion) or PE (e.g., shortness of breath, chest pain, and cough which may include hemoptysis). Because patients with PE can be asymptomatic, it is recommended that a patient with a DVT be evaluated for PE regardless of symptoms.

Evaluation for DVTs. In the absence of cardiopulmonary compromise, consider the d-dimer assay and/or ultrasonographic evaluation.

Evaluation of PE. High-resolution chest CT (so called spiral CT) with contrast is recommended. Ventilation-perfusion nuclear medicine scanning may be appropriate in some cases.

Treatment of DVT and PE should follow recommended anticoagulation guidelines for these disorders. The authors recommend hematologic evaluation and consultation for consideration of anticoagulant prophylaxis for patients undergoing surgery or other procedures that may predispose to DVT/PE.

Bullous pulmonary disease. Although uncommon, bullous pulmonary disease does affect some patients with Proteus syndrome, and, as with other disease manifestations, this can progress with startling rapidity. Pulmonary evaluation is recommended for these patients and resection of large bullous lesions may be indicated in some cases. Bullous disease in the context of scoliosis can pose significant and complex challenges for appropriate management.

Psychosocial issues. In addition to functional compromise, the skeletal and connective tissue overgrowth of PS can result in disfigurement for some patients, a significant concern for many families [Turner et al 2007]. This condition is progressive and the degree of severity varies widely among patients, creating uncertainty for both clinicians and families. Coping with an ultra-rare and chronic condition like PS poses challenges for many patients and families, and genetic and psychosocial counseling is certainly warranted in most instances.

Although PS is exceedingly rare, a robust support group infrastructure exists and many families find this very helpful (see Resources).

Surveillance



Individualized surveillance plans for the skeletal, pulmonary, soft-tissue, and other manifestations of PS should be developed according to patients’ specific needs.

Because of the predisposition to a range of tumors (most of which are benign) patients should be monitored by their primary care provider with regular evaluations including a directed medical history and examination.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Because PS is not inherited, relatives are not at increased risk and do not require evaluation.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.