http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/prs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase (PRS) superactivity, the following evaluations are recommended:

All individuals. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor


Juvenile/adult onset

Serum uric acid concentration

Joint examination for evidence of gout; generally, evaluation of joint integrity only, except during an acute flare of arthritis or an individual with chronic deformity or tophus formation following multiple attacks

Assessment of renal function and renal structural integrity (e.g., renal ultrasound examination)

Infantile onset. In addition to evaluations listed under Juvenile/adult onset:

Neurologic evaluation for hypotonia, ataxia, presence/absence of tendon reflexes

Audiometry for evidence of hearing loss, a critical differential point

Treatment of Manifestations



Hyperuricemia and hyperuricosuria in individuals with PRS superactivity can be reduced by treatment with the following:

Reduced intake of red and organ meats, poultry, and shellfish [Choi et al 2004], oily fish (e.g. anchovies, sardines), beer, avoidance of high-fructose corn syrup-containing foods and drinks, and increased low-fat dairy intake

Allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, prescribed in doses with the ultimate aim of achieving serum urate concentrations lower than 6.0 mg/dL (360 μmol/L). The starting dose should be 100 mg once a day (in adults) with titration every three to four weeks according to the serum urate concentration. However, because of the uric acid overproduction and excessive uric acid excretion, allopurinol should be prescribed conservatively, as there is a high risk for xanthinuria and xanthine renal lithiasis – see Prevention of Secondary Complications.

Febuxostat, a newer urate-lowering xanthine oxidase inhibitor. Febuxostat has not been tested in individuals with PRS superactivity, but there is no reason a priori to doubt that it will be effective in the treatment of this disorder. Febuxostat should also be prescribed conservatively, because of a high risk for xanthinuria causing renal lithiasis. Note: Excretion of >1.1 g uric acid per day in an adult is associated with a greater than 50% risk for kidney stones.

High daily fluid intake (i.e., ≥2 L/day in the adult)

Potassium citrate (usually administered 4x/day to alkalinize the urine) when urate urinary tract stones are present or uric acid gravel is in the urine [Becker 2008]. Xanthinuria does not respond to urinary alkalinization.

Note: The interventions described only prevent/treat gout and the other metabolic complications of hyperuricemia; they have no known beneficial effect on hearing loss or neurodevelopmental impairment.

Sensorineural hearing loss is managed in the usual manner (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview, Management).

Ataxia is managed in the usual manner (see Hereditary Ataxias, Management).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Gout and renal lithiasis caused by chronically elevated serum and urine uric acid, the result of purine overproduction, can be reduced by a xanthine oxidase inhibitor.

Some neurologic attributes of the severe form of the disease may be preventable by early treatment with S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), although this is experimental (see Therapies Under Investigation).

Prevention of Secondary Complications



By analogy to individuals with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, who also have marked purine overproduction, xanthine oxidase inhibition with allopurinol or febuxostat may result in the formation of xanthine urinary tract stones. These radiolucent stones can be confused clinically with uric acid stones. If residual symptoms of urolithiasis occur in PRS superactivity despite the achievement of goal serum urate concentrations, a stone should be isolated for analysis and/or urinary xanthine concentration should be measured. Management of this pharmacologically induced complication includes reduction in daily allopurinol or febuxostat dosing, with the possible need to accept serum urate concentrations higher than the usual goal range (<6.0 mg/dL; 360 μmol/L).

Surveillance



Monthly measurement of 24-hour uric acid excretion in the urine is particularly helpful in the assessment of the response to treatment. Alternatively, a spot urinary urate/creatinine ratio can be informative if accessibility to samples is restricted.

Once a normal serum urate concentration is achieved and maintained, serum urate concentration should be monitored at a minimum annually to assure that the targeted concentration is maintained.

A 24-hour urine should also be monitored at a minimum annually for urate and xanthine concentrations particularly to ensure that urinary xanthine does not exceed solubility (<1 mmol/L); plasma xanthine is cleared efficiently and does not accumulate.

Audiometry should be repeated as deemed appropriate by treating audiologist/otolaryngologist.

Neurologic evaluation should be performed annually or more frequently as recommended by the treating neurologist.

Note: Under usual circumstances, renal functional consequences are avoided if serum urate concentration and urinary excretion of urate are normalized and urinary xanthine does not routinely exceed its solubility (~1 mmol/L).

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



The following should be avoided:

Red and organ meats, shellfish, or oily fish (e.g. anchovies, sardines) in excess; beer, high-fructose corn syrup-enriched foods and drinks [Choi et al 2004]

Dehydration

If possible, urate-retaining medications: low-dose aspirin, thiazide diuretics

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to screen apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives (regardless of gender) of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

Evaluations include:

Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known;

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, measurement of serum urate concentration; 24-hour urinary uric acid excretion or spot urine uric acid/creatinine ratio; and an audiology evaluation. Note: (1) Because collection of 24-hour urine in an infant or young child is very difficult, measurement of uric acid/creatinine ratio in a spot urine sample may be helpful. (2) Sometimes the serum urate concentrations are not extremely elevated in children with PRS superactivity, probably as a result of higher renal clearance of urate, however the urine urate excretion is abnormally high for age in all individuals.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Dietary S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) supplementation may theoretically alleviate some of the neurologic symptoms of severe PRS superactivity by providing an oral source of purine nucleotide precursor that is not PRPP dependent. Furthermore, SAM is known to cross the blood-brain barrier. Although PRS superactivity exhibits high purine nucleotides (adenylates/guanylates) in some cells, these are low in red blood cells, which rely on purine salvage metabolism, and are believed to be low in the brain, which also relies on purine salvage metabolism.

An adult with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome has been reported as benefiting neurologically from SAM administration without untoward side effects [Glick 2006].

For an open-label clinical trial of SAM in two Australian brothers (from ages 14 and 13 in 2010) with Arts syndrome [Christodoulou et al, unpublished data] (approved by the ethics and drug committees, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia), oral SAM supplementation was set at 30 mg/kg/day. The boys appeared to have had significant benefit from this therapy based on decreased number of hospitalizations and stabilization of nocturnal BIPAP requirements; however slight deterioration in their vision was noted. Eventually, they both died of respiratory failure at the ages of 19 and 18 years in association with a severe lower respiratory tract infection.

Mildly affected heterozygous females from families with Arts syndrome may also benefit from SAM supplementation in their diet, although this remains to be tested. Whether treatment with SAM supplementation would benefit individuals with allelic disorders (PRS superactivity, Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy X type 5) remains to be investigated.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.