http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/psach

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with pseudoachondroplasia, the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of height and plotting growth on a disorder-specific growth chart

Evaluation by history and physical examination for skeletal manifestations, ligamentous laxity, and arthritis

“Genetic” skeletal survey including: AP views of the hips, knees, and hands, as well as lateral views of the knees and spine

Evaluation of the cervical vertebrae because of the potentially serious clinical complications associated with cervical spine instability [Shetty et al 2007], which can be assessed by flexion/extension radiographs or MRI, especially in persons with neurologic symptoms suggestive of cord compression.

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Joint pain may be controlled with analgesics, but no systematic studies have evaluated the effectiveness of various forms of pain control in pseudoachondroplasia.

Osteotomy to treat the lower limb malalignment is common during childhood. The need for subsequent revision is also common, which most likely reflects the severe joint instability that can be present in some affected individuals [Hunter 1999, Li et al 2007].

Very few examples of extended limb lengthening have been reported for pseudoachondroplasia; thus, the outcome of this procedure in pseudoachondroplasia is not known.

Surgical treatment of scoliosis is rarely needed but may be effective in severe situations. Surgical methods are standard.

In persons with neurologic symptoms and radiographic evidence of cervical spine instability or cord compression, C1-C2 fixation is the recommended surgical procedure.

Awareness of psychosocial issues related to short stature, including stigmatization and discrimination, is important in caring for the individual. Social support organizations including the Little People of America and other similar organizations in other countries (see Resources) may be of great benefit in providing information to affected individuals and their families.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



The articular cartilage of individuals with pseudoachondroplasia is likely to be severely disrupted; therefore, directing the individual toward physical activities that do not accelerate joint degeneration will be beneficial.

Surveillance



Affected individuals should be examined regularly for the following by a medical geneticist and/or orthopedist familiar with the phenotype:

Symptomatic lower limb malalignment

Evidence of kyphoscoliosis

Symptoms related to joint hypermobility

Evidence of degenerative joint disease manifesting as joint pain or by radiographs

Neurologic manifestations, particularly spinal cord compression secondary to odontoid hypoplasia

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



In the small fraction of individuals with odontoid hypoplasia, extreme neck flexion and extension should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



For females with pseudoachondroplasia, delivery by cesarean section is often necessary because of the small size of the pelvis.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Growth hormone treatment is ineffective in pseudoachondroplasia [Kanazawa et al 2003].