

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 Because of the increased incidence of a second thrombophilic defect among symptomatic individuals with inherited thrombophilia [Emmerich et al 2001], individuals heterozygous or homozygous for the F2
20210G>A allele should be tested for other inherited and acquired thrombophilic disorders in order to evaluate the risk for thrombosis. Testing should include: An activated protein C resistance or DNA assay for factor V Leiden; Serologic assays for anticardiolipin antibodies and anti-beta 2 glycoprotein 1 antibodies; Multiple phospholipid-dependent coagulation assays for a lupus inhibitor. Note: Testing for antiphospholipid antibodies should include assays for all three antibodies (anticardiolipin antibodies, anti-beta2 glycoprotein 1 antibodies, and lupus inhibitors) since only 50% of individuals with the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome have more than one type of antibody. Evaluation of high-risk individuals (i.e., those with a history of recurrent VTE especially at a young age, or those with strong family history of VTE at a young age), should also include assays of: Protein C activity; Antithrombin activity; Protein S activity or free protein S antigen. Note: In an evaluation for thrombophilia: (1) Measurement of plasma concentration of homocysteine is no longer recommended because no data support the use of vitamin supplementation or modification of the duration of anticoagulation in individuals with hyperhomocysteinemia and a history of VTE [den Heijer et al 2007]; (2) there is no clinical rationale for DNA testing for MTHFR variants; and (3) routine measurement of factor VIII and other clotting factor levels is not recommended; however, such testing may be useful in certain instances [Bauer 2010, Jenkins et al 2012]

Treatment of Manifestations

 The management of thrombosis in individuals with prothrombin-related thrombophilia depends on the clinical circumstances. The first acute thrombosis should be treated according to standard guidelines with a course of low molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) or fondaparinux (a pentasaccharide) [Kearon et al 2012]. Low molecular-weight heparins and fondaparinux have largely replaced unfractionated heparin because of their many advantages [Garcia et al 2012]. Oral administration of warfarin is started concurrently with LMWH or fondaparinux (except during pregnancy) and monitored with the international-normalized ratio (INR). A target INR of 2.5 (therapeutic range: 2.0-3.0) provides effective anticoagulation, even in F2 20210G>A homozygotes. Rivaroxaban, a direct factor Xa inhibitor, is also approved for the treatment of acute DVT and PE and secondary prevention of recurrent VTE. Note: LMWH and warfarin are both safe in women who are breast-feeding. Rivaroxaban is contraindicated during pregnancy and breast-feeding because animal studies showed reproductive toxicity, and evidence that the drug crosses the placenta and is secreted in milk [Ageno et al 2012]. The duration of oral anticoagulation therapy should be based on an individualized assessment of the risks of VTE recurrence and anticoagulant-related bleeding. Approximately 30% of individuals with VTE experience recurrent thrombosis within the subsequent five years [Prandoni et al 2007]. Recurrence risk is determined by the clinical circumstances of the first event (provoked or unprovoked), adequacy of early treatment, and individual risk factors (see Clinical Description, Recurrent Thrombosis, Risk for recurrent thrombosis in adult 20210G>A heterozygotes. 20210G>A heterozygosity is generally not an indication for long-term anticoagulation in the absence of other risk factors. The presence of a hereditary thrombophilia was not a factor determining the duration of anticoagulation in the 2012 American College of Chest Physicians Guidelines on Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis based on evidence that inherited thrombophilic disorders are not major determinants of VTE recurrence risk [Kearon et al 2012] (full text). Other clinical guidelines and expert opinion also conclude that identification of 20210G>A heterozygosity should not affect clinical decision making [Baglin et al 2010, Bauer 2010, Kyrle et al 2010, Heleen van Ommen & Middeldorp 2011, Monagle et al 2012, National Clinical Guideline Centre 2012]. See Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements. Anticoagulation for at least three months is recommended for persons with DVT and/or PE associated with a transient (reversible) risk factor [Kearon et al 2012]. Long-term oral anticoagulation is recommended for individuals with a first or recurrent unprovoked (i.e., idiopathic) VTE and no risk factors for bleeding with good anticoagulation monitoring [Kearon et al 2012]. The decision should be based on an assessment of potential risks and benefits regardless of 20210G>A status [Berg et al 2011]. Long-term anticoagulation is considered in selected individuals homozygous for the 20210G>A allele or with multiple inherited or acquired thrombophilic disorders [De Stefano & Rossi 2013]. In these individuals at higher risk for recurrence, the potential benefits of long-term anticoagulation may outweigh the bleeding risks. LMWH, fondaparinux, warfarin, and rivaroxaban are the primary antithrombotic agents used for the acute and long-term treatment of VTE. Several direct thrombin inhibitors (lepirudin, argatroban, and dabigatran), and apixaban, a direct factor Xa inhibitor, are approved for use in specific circumstances [Schulman 2014]. Graduated compression stockings should be worn for at least two years following an acute DVT. Treatment of thrombosis in children. Treatment recommendations for children with VTE are largely adapted from studies in adults. There is no evidence that a 20210G>A allele should influence decisions about the intensity or duration of anticoagulation in children [Monagle et al 2012, Chalmers et al 2011, Heleen van Ommen & Middeldorp 2011, Monagle et al 2012]. British guidelines for antithrombotic therapy in children do not consider inherited thrombophilia as a determinant of either the intensity or duration of therapy. Children with a first VTE should receive initial treatment with either unfractionated heparin (UFH) or LMWH for at least five days. LMWH is favored over warfarin for continued therapy, especially in very young children and those with complex medical problems. Recommendations on the duration of antithrombotic therapy are based on the nature of the thrombotic event (e.g., spontaneous or provoked) [Chalmers et al 2011, Monagle et al 2012, Chalmers et al 2011] (see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements). Anticoagulation is recommended: For at least three months after a VTE provoked by a clinical risk factor that has resolved. Beyond three months until the risk factor has resolved in children with ongoing but potentially reversible risk factors. For six to 12 months after a first idiopathic (unprovoked) VTE. Indefinitely for those with recurrent idiopathic VTE Expert opinion emphasizes the importance of a careful risk/benefit assessment in each individual [Raffini & Thornburg 2009, Heleen van Ommen & Middeldorp 2011]. Consensus guidelines are also available for management of stroke in infants and children [Monagle et al 2012].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 In the absence of a history of thrombosis, long-term anticoagulation is not recommended for asymptomatic 20210G>A heterozygotes, since the 1%-3% yearly risk for major bleeding from warfarin is greater than the estimated (<1%) yearly risk for thrombosis [Martinelli et al 2000a, Middeldorp & van Hylckama Vlieg 2008, Berg et al 2011]. Prophylactic anticoagulation may be considered in high-risk clinical settings such as surgery, pregnancy, or prolonged immobilization, although currently no evidence confirms the benefit of primary prophylaxis for asymptomatic 20210G>A heterozygotes. Factors that may influence decisions about the indication for and duration of anticoagulation include age, family history, and other coexisting risk factors. Recommendations for prophylaxis at the time of surgery and other high-risk situations are available in the 2012 American College of Chest Physicians consensus guidelines [Guyatt et al 2012] (full text).

Surveillance

 Individuals receiving long-term anticoagulation require periodic reevaluation to confirm that the benefits of anticoagulation continue to outweigh the bleeding risk. Selected 20210G>A heterozygotes who do not require long-term anticoagulation may benefit from evaluation prior to exposure to circumstantial risk factors such as surgery or pregnancy. (See Prevention of Primary Manifestations.)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 F2 20210G>A heterozygotes: With a history of VTE should avoid estrogen contraception and HRT; asymptomatic women should be counseled on the risks of estrogen-containing contraception and HRT and should consider alternative forms of contraception and strategies for control of menopausal symptoms. Who are asymptomatic and elect to use oral contraceptives should avoid formulations with third-generation and other progestins with a higher thrombotic risk; Who elect short-term hormone replacement therapy for severe menopausal symptoms should use low-dose transdermal preparations, which have a lower thrombotic risk than oral formulations [Straczek et al 2005, Canonico et al 2007, Renoux et al 2010]. F2 20210G>A homozygous women with or without prior VTE should avoid estrogen-containing contraception and HRT.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 The genetic status of asymptomatic at-risk family members can be established using molecular genetic testing. However, as there is no clinical evidence that early diagnosis reduces morbidity or mortality, the indications for family testing are unresolved and the decision to test at-risk family members should be made on an individual basis [Segal et al 2009]. Clarification of 20210G>A allele status may be useful in: Asymptomatic adult family members of probands with one or two known 20210G>A alleles, especially those with a strong family history of VTE at a young age; Asymptomatic female family members of probands with known prothrombin-related thrombophilia who are pregnant or considering estrogen contraception or pregnancy. There is no clinical evidence to support testing asymptomatic children with a family history of thrombosis and/or inherited thrombophilia. Guidelines suggest delaying testing until children are able to understand the implications of the results and (optimally) can give informed consent for testing [Chalmers et al 2011]. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 No consensus exists on the optimal management of prothrombin thrombophilia during pregnancy; guidelines are derived from studies in non-pregnant individuals [Kujovich 2004a, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2009, Baglin et al 2010, Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b]; see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements. LMWH is the preferred antithrombotic agent for prophylaxis during pregnancy. All women with inherited thrombophilia should undergo individualized risk assessment. Decisions about anticoagulation should be based on the number and type of thrombophilic defects, coexisting risk factors, and personal and family history of thrombosis [Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b]. Prophylactic anticoagulation during pregnancy: Is recommended for all women: With a history of unprovoked VTE, including those heterozygous for 20210G>A. LMWH should be given during pregnancy followed by six weeks of postpartum anticoagulation [Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2009, Baglin et al 2010, Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b]. Heterozygous for the 20210G>A allele with a prior pregnancy or estrogen-related thrombosis who are also at an increased risk for recurrence [Pabinger et al 2005, De Stefano et al 2006, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2009, Baglin et al 2010, Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b]. Should be considered for: Asymptomatic women doubly heterozygous for 20210G>A and factor V Leiden, especially those with coexisting circumstantial risk factors (obesity, immobilization, multiple gestation) [Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2009, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b]; Asymptomatic homozygous women with a family history of thrombosis [Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b]. Is not routinely recommended in asymptomatic heterozygous women with no history of thrombosis or other risk factors. These women should be counseled about potential thrombotic complications during pregnancy and the postpartum period [Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b]. In two large prospective studies, low-risk asymptomatic women with thrombophilia (including 20210G>A heterozygosity) did not receive LMWH during pregnancy in the absence of additional risk factors. All women received a course of postpartum anticoagulation. The low incidence of antepartum VTE in both studies (0% and 0.34%) suggested that anticoagulation may be safely withheld during pregnancy in low-risk 20210G>A heterozygotes who do not have other risk factors [Bauersachs et al 2007, Dargaud et al 2009]. A six-week course of postpartum prophylactic anticoagulation is recommended for: Heterozygous women with a positive family history of VTE or other additional risk factors; All asymptomatic homozygous women; All women with a prior history of VTE [Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b]. Prevention of pregnancy loss. It is still unkown if prophylactic antithrombotic therapy improves pregnancy outcome in women with inherited thrombophilia and recurrent pregnancy loss. The available evidence consists of predominantly uncontrolled trials, observational studies, and a few randomized trials with important methodologic limitations. There are no prospective randomized trials that include an untreated control group that confirms the benefit of LMWH for preventing pregnancy loss in women with inherited thrombophilia. Of note, the ALIFE2 study, a multicenter randomized trial of LMWH versus standard surveillance in women with inherited thrombophilia and a history of recurrent miscarriage, began recruitment in December 2012 (www.trialregister.nl, NTR 3361). Current consensus guidelines and expert opinion recommend against the use of antithrombotic therapy in women with inherited thrombophilia and unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss outside of clinical trials because of the absence of high quality evidence confirming benefit [Baglin et al 2010, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2011a, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 2011b, Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b, Middeldorp 2013]. Studies suggesting that prophylactic anticoagulation improves pregnancy outcome: The results of several observational studies suggested that prophylactic antithrombotic therapy may improve pregnancy outcome in women with inherited thrombophilia and recurrent pregnancy loss [Brenner et al 2000, Carp et al 2003]. A recent study of women with a history of unexplained pregnancy loss compared the frequency of obstetric complications in women with factor V Leiden or 20210G>A alleles and women without thrombophilia. Women with a thrombophilic disorder with a prior fetal loss after ten weeks’ gestation who received enoxaparin during their next pregnancy had a significantly lower rate of fetal loss and severe preeclampsia and a higher rate of live births compared to women without a thrombophilic disorder with the same obstetric history who did not receive prophylaxis [Bouvier et al 2014]. A prospective randomized trial compared prophylactic-dose enoxaparin and low-dose aspirin in women heterozygous for 20210G>A, factor V Leiden, or protein S deficiency, and a history of a single unexplained fetal loss after ten weeks’ gestation. Enoxaparin prophylaxis was associated with a significantly higher live birth rate of 86% compared to 29% with aspirin. However, there were methodologic problems with this study and the results have not been confirmed in other trials. Studies suggesting that prophylactic anticoagulation does not improve pregnancy outcome: Several studies found no benefit with LMWH on pregnancy outcome in women with inherited thrombophilia [Laskin et al 2009, Warren et al 2009, Visser et al 2011]. Two recent randomized trials compared the efficacy of LMWH and aspirin to no antithrombotic therapy or placebo in women with unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss. Combined LMWH and low-dose aspirin did not increase the live birth rate in either study [Clark et al 2010, Kaandorp et al 2010]. Because only a small proportion of the study populations had inherited thrombophilia (3.5% and 15.7%), subgroup analyses were insufficiently powered to assess the effect of antithrombotic therapy. In the recent Thrombophilia in Pregnancy Prophylaxis Study (TIPPS) multinational randomized trial, antepartum prophylactic LMWH did not reduce the incidence of pregnancy loss or placenta-mediated complications in pregnant women with thrombophilia (22% with a 20210G>A allele) who are at high risk for these complications [Rodger et al 2014]. Other pregnancy complications. Data supporting the benefit of antithrombotic therapy in women with inherited thrombophilia and other pregnancy complications are considerably more limited and also conflicting [Gris et al 2011, de Vries et al 2012, Martinelli et al 2012]. There is insufficient evidence that LMWH (with or without aspirin) reduces the risk for preeclampsia, placental abruption, or other obstetric complications in women with or without inherited thrombophilia. Current guidelines recommend against antithrombotic prophylaxis for women with inherited thrombophilia and a history of pregnancy complications [Baglin et al 2010, Bates et al 2012, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013b].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Several new oral anticoagulants (which have not been specifically studied in individuals with inherited thrombophilia) are alternatives to warfarin in specific clinical settings. Dabigatran (a direct thrombin inhibitor) and rivaroxaban and apixaban (two new factor Xa inhibitors) are approved for the prevention of stroke and systemic embolism in patients with atrial fibrillation [Weitz et al 2012]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.