http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pura-dis

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a PURA-related neurodevelopmental disorder, the following evaluations are recommended.


Table 2. 

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis




Affected System
Evaluation
Comment





Cognitive

Developmental assessment




Neurologic

Neurologic evaluation



Brain MRI
Indicated in a child w/a PURA-related neurodevelopmental disorder w/seizures and/or hypoventilation and/or abnormal vision or eye movements who has not previously had a brain MRI


EEG and video EEG
If seizures are suspected



Eyes

Ophthalmology examination
Electrodiagnostic tests may be indicated in some cases.



Cardiovascular

Consider echocardiogram




Respiratory

Assessment of pulmonary function
As needed



Gastrointestinal

Feeding assessment w/analysis of swallowing & evaluation for possible aspiration
As needed


Assessment for constipation



Genitourinary

Consider ultrasound of the urinary tract




Musculoskeletal

Appropriate radiographs
If hip dysplasia and/or scoliosis is suspected



Endocrine

Assessment of serum vitamin D levels



Assessment of bone density
If osteoporosis or osteopenia is suspected


Evaluation of anterior pituitary hormones
If necessary



Miscellaneous/other

Consultation w/a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals often benefit when management is provided by a multidisciplinary team including relevant specialists, which may include, but is not limited to, a pediatrician, clinical geneticist, child neurologist, pulmonologist, ophthalmologist, orthopedic surgeon, physiotherapist, occupational therapist, and speech and language therapist.


Table 3. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with PURA-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders




Manifestation
Treatment
Considerations/Other




Cognitive/developmental delay
See Global Developmental Disability/ Intellectual Disability Educational Issues.



Seizures
Management by a neurologist
May include video EEG monitoring to help distinguish epileptic from non-epileptic events (e.g., dystonia, dyskinesia, dysconjugate eye movements)


Vision deficits
Correction of refractive errors; vision support; standard treatment for strabismus & exophoria



Hypoventilation
Supplementary oxygen (at night) & rarely tracheostomy
Ambulatory peripheral saturation monitoring may be required.


Some infants require short periods of intubation & mechanical ventilation, particularly during acute illness.


Congenital heart defect
Management as per current practice for the specific congenital heart defect



Frequent aspiration (or high risk of aspiration)
A percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube may be considered.



GERD
Medical management; consideration of Nissen fundoplication if medical treatment is not sufficient



Constipation
Routine management
Referral to a gastroenterologist may be required in severe cases.


Congenital urogenital defect
Management as per current practice for the specific urogenital defect



Scoliosis
Standard management
Progressive neuropathic scoliosis may require spinal fusion.


Osteoporosis/osteopenia
Standard management



Instability in standing position
Ankle foot orthoses (AFO) may improve stability, allowing for better standing & transferring ability.



Neuropathic hip dysplasia, progressive subluxation, & dislocation
Consideration of hip reconstructions w/varus derotational proximal femoral osteotomies
Generalized joint laxity & continued inability to walk may cause relapsing hip subluxation even after previous femoral osteotomies.


Vitamin D deficiency
Vitamin D supplementation



Anterior pituitary hormone deficiencies
Standard treatment as directed by an endocrinologist






GERD = gastroesophageal reflux disease

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with PURA-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders GERD = gastroesophageal reflux disease The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay/intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.

Global Developmental Disability/ Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

For ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a nationwide, federally funded program available in all states. For ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. An evaluation will occur before placement to determine needed services and therapies and will be subsequently written into an individualized education plan (IEP). 
For ages 5-21 years In the United States, an IEP should be developed by the local public school district based on each individual’s level of function. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21. Discussion about transition plans including financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood. For all ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure that appropriate community, state, and educational agencies are involved and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider: Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician. In the United States, enrollment in DDA (Developmental Disabilities Administration) is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and supports to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities. In the United States, families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction


Gross motor dysfunction Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility and to reduce the risk for later-onset orthopedic complications (e.g., scoliosis, hip dislocation). Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers). For muscle tone abnormalities including dystonia, consider involving appropriate specialists to aid in management of medications or orthopedic procedures. Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function (e.g., feeding, grooming, dressing). Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy (typically from an occupational or speech therapist) is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control. Communication issues. Consider alternative means of communication for individuals who have expressive language difficulties, such as an Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) evaluation.

Surveillance




Table 4. 

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with PURA-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders




Affected System
Evaluation
Frequency/Comment





Cognitive

Monitoring by developmental pediatrics
Long-term



Neurologic

EEG & video EEG monitoring
If seizures are suspected



Eyes

Ophthalmologic & vision evaluations
Routine



Gastrointestinal

Monitoring for dysphagia & constipation
Routine



Musculoskeletal

Monitoring for musculoskeletal complications including hip dysplasia & scoliosis
Routine

Recommended Surveillance for Individuals with PURA-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorders

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.