http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pws

Management

Management of the manifestations of Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is age dependent and should include both addressing of the consequences of PWS and anticipatory guidance. It is recommended that a team approach be used, if possible. Several approaches to management have been published [Goldstone et al 2008, Cassidy & Driscoll 2009, Cassidy & McCandless 2010, McCandless 2011, Cassidy et al 2012].

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with PWS, the following evaluations are recommended: Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor Endocrinology consultation Nutritional consultation Assessment of newborns and young infants for sucking problems and failure to thrive Regardless of age, measurement and plotting of height, weight, head circumference and body mass index (BMI) on either age-appropriate growth charts or charts developed for PWS [Butler et al 2011, Butler et al 2015] Assessment for hypothyroidism in children, especially those with prolonged failure to thrive, those with excess weight gain in the absence of increased food intake, and those with poor linear growth despite growth hormone treatment Evaluation of respiratory status with a low threshold for performing a sleep study regardless of age. These studies are specifically recommended prior to the initiation of growth hormone therapy (GHT) and four to eight weeks after starting GHT, along with assessment of the size of tonsils and adenoids, particularly in the obese individual. Assessment of development of infants and of educational development of children including a speech evaluation Assessment for the presence of behavioral problems and obsessive-compulsive features after age two years, and for psychosis in adolescents and adults. If history reveals evidence of these problems, referral for more detailed assessment is indicated. Assessment of males for the presence of cryptorchidism regardless of age Referral for ophthalmologic evaluation if strabismus is present, and for assessment of visual acuity by age one year or at diagnosis if it is later Regardless of age, assessment for the presence of scoliosis clinically, and, if indicated, radiographically Note: Very obese individuals cannot be adequately assessed for scoliosis clinically; x-rays are necessary to establish the diagnosis.

Treatment of Manifestations

A team approach to management is recommended [Goldstone et al 2008, Cassidy & McCandless 2010]. Feeding, hyperphagia, and obesity. Special feeding techniques, including special nipples or gavage feeding, may be necessary for the first weeks to months of life to assure adequate nutrition and avoid failure to thrive. Individuals diagnosed with PWS typically do not need a G-tube since the feeding will improve with time. When weight centiles begin increasing in nutritional phase 2a (typically between 18 and 36 months), a program of a well-balanced, low-calorie diet, regular exercise, and close supervision to minimize food stealing should be instituted to prevent obesity (i.e., BMI Z score of <2) and its consequences. The same program is appropriate if obesity is present at any time. Consultation with a dietician and close follow up are usually necessary, and locking the kitchen, refrigerator, and/or cupboards is often needed once the child is able to open the refrigerator and cupboards. Caloric needs of infants and children with PWS are typically 60%-80% of the recommended daily allowance (RDA). The energy requirement of adults with PWS, which rarely exceeds 1200-1400 Kcal/day, should be considered in planning daily food intake. Assessment of adequacy of vitamin and mineral intake by a dietician, and prescription of appropriate supplementation, is indicated, especially for calcium and vitamin D. No medications are known to aid in controlling hyperphagia, but several clinical trials are underway (see Therapies Under Investigation). Gastric bypass is not recommended in PWS, as it does not appear to correct the lack of satiety and will not prevent overeating. In addition, complication rates are high [Scheimann et al 2012]. Growth hormone treatment normalizes height, increases lean body mass, decreases fat mass, and increases mobility, which are beneficial to weight management. Dose recommendations in young children are generally similar to those for individuals with isolated growth hormone deficiency (i.e., ~1 mg/m2/day) but the dose must be individualized as the child grows. Therapy can be started in infancy or at the time of diagnosis. The adult dose of growth hormone is 20%-25% of the dose recommended in children. Monitoring of growth velocity, head circumference, and serum IGF-1 is important to avoid overtreatment. Controlled trials of growth hormone therapies have demonstrated significant benefit from infancy through adulthood [Carrel et al 2010, Sode-Carlsen et al 2010, Wolfgram et al 2013]. An increase in language and cognitive skills in treated infants [Myers et al 2007] and an improvement in mental speed and flexibility as well as motor performance in adults [Höybye et al 2005] have been reported based on controlled trials. A review of the results of one to two years of growth hormone treatment among 328 children documented in the database of one pharmaceutical company indicated improved height velocity, particularly in prepubertal children, but no change in BMI [Craig et al 2006]. Significantly greater adult height was demonstrated in 21 individuals treated long term versus 39 untreated individuals without an increase in adverse side effects [Angulo et al 2007]. Some improvements in cognition have been suggested with growth hormone therapy in individuals with PWS [Osório 2012, Siemensma 2012], but more work and longer studies need to be done. Although there was initial concern about growth hormone treatment contributing to scoliosis in PWS, later studies showed no difference in frequency or severity in those treated compared to those who were not treated [Nagai et al 2006, Angulo et al 2007]. Decreased saliva production can be addressed with products developed for the treatment of dry mouth, including special toothpastes, gels, mouthwash, and gum. Therapies, education and behavior management. Early intervention in children before age three years, particularly physical therapy, may improve muscle strength and encourage achievement of developmental milestones. In older individuals, daily muscle training increases physical activity and lean body mass [Schlumpf et al 2006]. Initiate appropriate educational programming in children: Begin speech therapy for language delay and articulation abnormalities in infancy and childhood. Special education, either in an inclusion setting or in a self-contained classroom setting, is usually necessary during school age. An individual aide is helpful in assuring attendance to task. Social skills training groups have been beneficial. Behavioral disturbance should be addressed with behavioral management programs, including firm limit setting. While no medication is beneficial in managing behavior in all individuals with PWS, serotonin reuptake inhibitors have helped the largest proportion of affected teenagers and adults, particularly those with obsessive-compulsive symptoms [Brice 2000, Dykens & Shah 2003]. Psychosis is reported to respond well to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, but not to mood stabilizers [Soni et al 2007]. There are no well-designed studies of the effectiveness of treatment for psychosis in PWS [Ho & Dimitropoulos 2010]. Hypogonadism. Cryptorchidism may resolve spontaneously, even up to adolescence, but usually requires hormonal and surgical approaches; however, preservation of fertility is not an issue. Standard treatment is appropriate. Human chorionic gonadotropin treatment for infants with undescended testes should be considered as it can improve the size of the scrotal sac and improve surgical outcome [McCandless 2011; Angulo & Miller, unpublished data]. Replacement of sex hormones produces adequate secondary sexual characteristics but is somewhat controversial because of the possible role of testosterone replacement in behavior problems in males and the role of estrogen replacement in the risk of stroke as well as hygiene concerns related to menstruation in females. Daily use of the testosterone patch or gel may avert exacerbation of behavioral problems by providing a more even blood level than use of a slow-release depo-testosterone injection every month. Also, it was shown in the non-PWS adult population that depo- testosterone injections were associated with a greater risk of cardiovascular events, hospitalizations, and deaths compared with gels and patches [Layton et al 2015]. Concern about osteoporosis should be considered in deciding about hormone replacement. Recent reports of fertility in four women with PWS raise the issue of need for birth control [Akefeldt et al 1999; Schulze et al 2001; Vats & Cassidy, unpublished data]. Sleep issues. Disturbed sleep in children and adults should prompt a sleep study, as treatment may be available. Treatment depends on the cause and may include tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy and/or CPAP or BiPAP, as in the general population. Excessive daytime sleepiness (unrelated to the degree of sleep apnea) is frequently seen in individuals with PWS. Modafinil has been shown to be a safe and effective treatment for this condition [De Cock et al 2011]. Skin picking. One study demonstrated decreased skin picking with topiramate treatment in some individuals [Shapira et al 2004]; other clinicians have reported anecdotally that approximately half of individuals with PWS who skin pick benefit from low-dose (25-50 mg daily) topiramate. A recent study of 35 individuals with PWS (age 5-39 years) using 450-1200 mg/day of N-acetylcysteine found a high degree of success in reducing or eliminating skin picking [Miller & Angulo 2014]. 
Other Management of strabismus is as for any infant. Management of scoliosis, hip dysplasia, and complications of obesity is as in the general population. Adulthood. For adults with PWS, the most successful living situation for behavior and weight management is a group home specially designated for individuals with PWS, where diet and access to food are tightly restricted and exercise is included in daily activities. Affected individuals generally require a sheltered employment environment. Issues of guardianship, wills, trusts, and advocacy should be investigated no later than adolescence.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Obesity may be prevented if the diet, exercise, and supervision program described in Treatment of Manifestations is instituted. Early diagnosis allows the clinician to begin anticipatory guidance concerning the natural history of PWS, and in particular the nutritional phases, informing the family about the risk of obesity and the need to monitor weight increase and to restrict calories beginning around 18-36 months of age. If started at a young age, growth hormone treatment, along with good dietary control, may retard obesity and the high proportion of fat mass. It may also prevent development of the typical facial appearance and improve motor milestones.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Diabetes mellitus rarely occurs in the absence of obesity. Calcium and vitamin D supplementation are probably beneficial, as low-calorie diets are often low in dairy products and osteoporosis has been documented in the majority of older children and adults with PWS. If osteoporosis develops, consider treatment with a bisphosphonate. Although no formal study exists, individuals with PWS tend to be very sensitive to medications of all kinds. Starting with lower doses is recommended.

Surveillance

Health supervision guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) have been published [McCandless 2011] (full text). To assure appropriateness of exercise program and diet, including adequacy of vitamin and mineral intake and monitor height, weight, and BMI (weight in kg/height in m2): Every month in infancy; Every six months in the first decade of life; At least annually thereafter. Cryptorchidism can recur after orchidopexy; therefore, testicular position should be monitored. Evaluate for the presence of diabetes mellitus by standard methods (e.g., obtaining glycosylated hemoglobin concentration and/or glucose tolerance test) in anyone with significant obesity or rapid significant weight gain. Test annually for hypothyroidism, including free T4 and TSH levels. Obtain history of any sleep disturbance; if present, obtain a sleep study. Monitor for development of scoliosis clinically or, in the presence of obesity, radiographically at least annually. Perform bone densitometry by DEXA to evaluate for possible osteoporosis every two years in adulthood. Obtain history for behavioral and psychiatric disturbance at least annually.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

In the last few years there has been great interest by the pharmaceutical industry in testing treatments for the major manifestations of PWS – particularly the hyperphagia, obesity, and behavioral problems. For a detailed description of these studies, click here (pdf). Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.