

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a known ATP1A3-related neurologic disorder, the following evaluations are recommended: 
            Rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism (RDP)
           Brain imaging to exclude stroke EEG to evaluate possibility of seizures Neuropsychological testing to evaluate cognitive or memory problems Note: Questionnaires to prompt treating clinicians to elicit history and observations relevant to disease symptoms and management may be obtained from organizations included in Resources. 
            Alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC)
           Brain imaging to exclude stroke EEG to evaluate possibility of seizures Note: Questionnaires to prompt treating clinicians to elicit history and observations relevant to disease symptoms and management may be obtained from organizations included in Resources. 
            Cerebellar ataxia, areflexia, pes cavus, optic atrophy, and sensorineural hearing loss (CAPOS) syndrome
           Brain imaging to evaluate the cerebellum EMG for areflexia and assessment for pes cavus to evaluate for peripheral neuropathy Ophthalmology consult and OCT (optical coherence tomography) for evaluation of optic atrophy Audiogram and hearing specialist consultation to evaluate sensorineural hearing loss

Treatment of Manifestations

 
            For all phenotypes
           Critical care: standard management of manifestations such as seizure or apnea Note: A seizure care plan, with provision of rescue therapy for prolonged seizures if indicated, is strongly recommended for those in whom epilepsy has been confirmed by either electrodiagnostic testing or highly suggestive clinical features. Occupational therapy to maximize motor function Speech therapy for dysarthria RDP. In a few patients with RDP decreased spasms have been noted with high-dose benzodiazepines. Dosing should be judged by the physician on an individual basis. Standard therapies for the following are appropriate: Seizures Dysphagia Psychotherapy for mood disorder (such as depression and anxiety), substance abuse, and/or psychosis Two individuals treated with deep brain stimulation [Kamm et al 2008] did not show marked improvement [A Brashear, personal communication]. AHC. Medical treatment generally involves the following [Neville & Ninan 2007]: Episode prophylaxis (avoiding triggers; reducing the frequency and/or severity of recurrent paroxysmal episodes by sleep – either natural or induced with daily prophylactic medications): Prophylactic medications Flunarizine. Symptomatic benefit in reducing the frequency and/or severity of the recurrent paroxysmal episodes of neurologic dysfunction has been reported with flunarizine [Silver & Andermann 1993, Sasaki 2001]. Flunarizine has been examined in a few small series of patients, and is reported to decrease the frequency and/or severity of the episodic dystonic and/or plegic episodes. In spite of the lack of well-designed placebo-controlled trials, flunarizine has remained the most commonly prescribed therapy for prophylaxis of episodic neurologic dysfunction in AHC for more than two decades. Note that abrupt withdrawal of the medication has been associated with deterioration in clinical status [Sweney et al 2009, Sasaki et al 2014a]. Topiramate is another commonly prescribed agent for prophylaxis [Jiang et al 2006, Chi et al 2012]. Sleep. Placing the affected individual in a quiet, dark room or putting a child down for a nap can help alleviate severe episodes and/or promote an earlier recovery. Acute attack management with use of various rescue medications including: Benzodiazepines, which are commonly used and reported to be of some benefit in increasingly the tolerability of episodes, especially for severe or prolonged dystonic episodes Chloral hydrate Other sleep inducers A low threshold for suspicion of seizure activity is critical, particularly in the setting of either recurrent brief or more prolonged tonic or dystonic episodes associated with alterations in consciousness or apparent awareness of their environment. Epilepsy management utilizes existing anticonvulsants. Recently, two separate reports described patients with AHC who responded to a ketogenic diet [Ulate-Campos et al 2014, Roubergue et al 2015]. CAPOS syndrome. Symptomatic treatment includes hearing and visual aids.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 When dystonia is present, physical therapy to prevent contractures in the hands and feet is appropriate.

Surveillance

 Patients with RDP need to be monitored for evidence of: Dysphagia, which (rarely) requires use of a feeding tube Psychiatric symptoms Seizures, which are reported in some individuals following acute onset of RDP Patients with AHC need to be monitored for evidence of seizures which occur over time in a large proportion of affected individuals. Patients with CAPOS syndrome need to be monitored for evidence of swallow dysfunction in order to reduce the risk of aspiration

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 At-risk family members and asymptomatic individuals with an ATP1A3 pathogenic variant are cautioned to avoid alcohol or excessive exercise. Infections and fever also are common triggers, and although practical prevention strategies are lacking, unnecessary exposure should be avoided. There is no known reason to avoid vaccinations. RDP. Triggers associated with the abrupt onset of RDP that should be avoided include (but are not limited to) the following: Alcohol Fever Psychological stress Excessive exercise (such as running track) AHC. Triggers associated with inducing paroxysmal episodes in AHC [Sweney et al 2009] include the following: Psychological stress Emotional excitement Environmental stressors: bright light (sunlight or fluorescent lighting), excessive heat or cold, or situations associated with excessive sound, crowds Water exposure in the form of bathing, swimming, shampooing Certain foods or odors: chocolate, food dyes, missed meals Excessive or atypically strenuous exercise (e.g., walking farther than usual, use of a playground swing) Illness Irregular sleep, missing a nap, delayed bedtime CAPOS syndrome. Febrile illness can trigger an episode of ataxic encephalopathy and/or weakness.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 The pregnancy of a woman should be monitored for symptoms of RDP, onset of which has followed childbirth in some (not all) women who are heterozygous for an ATP1A3 pathogenic variant. In principle, abortion or caesarean section could be sufficiently stressful to also be a trigger.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Levodopa and dopamine agonists usually provide little benefit, but are an important part of the diagnostic workup. There is no known way to prevent the abrupt onset of symptoms in RDP. During the abrupt onset, no acute treatment other than symptomatic relief of dystonia is available.