

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with a RASA1-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended: Medical history and physical examination with a focus on symptoms and findings secondary to arteriovenous malformations/arteriovenous fistulas (AVMs/AVFs) Brain imaging –if not already performed- to identify AVMs/AVFs (e.g., vein of Galen aneurysms and other intracranial AVMs) to allow early identification of macrofistulas that can be treated prior to the development of symptoms [Revencu et al 2008] Consideration of spine imaging to identify and characterize AVMs/AVFs. Currently no consensus protocols for radiographic evaluation of individuals with RASA1-related disorders have been developed; therefore, discussion with a radiologist is recommended in order to develop an appropriate plan for imaging based on the patient's age and the capabilities and experience of the imaging facility. Consideration of further imaging in individuals with evidence of cardiac overload, to look for causative AVMs/AVFs Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Capillary malformations (CMs). Referral to a dermatologist can be considered for evaluation of CMs that are of cosmetic concern and discussion of the risks and benefits of intervention. AVMs/AVFs. The risks and benefits of intervention for AVMs and AVFs must be considered. Depending on the location and symptoms of AVMs/AVFs, a multi-disciplinary team including specialists in interventional radiology, neurosurgery, surgery, cardiology, and dermatology is recommended to determine appropriate approaches (e.g., embolization vs. surgery). Cardiac overload. Referral to a cardiologist is indicated if cardiac overload is suspected. Hemihyperplasia and/or leg length discrepancy. Referral to an orthopedist is recommended in individuals with hemihyperplasia and leg length discrepancy. Lymphangiography to evaluate for lymphatic malformations may be considered. Compression stockings for those with evidence of lymphedema may be considered.

Surveillance

 The clinician should have a low threshold to repeat imaging studies if clinical signs/symptoms of AVMs/AVFs become evident over time.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Although no agents/circumstances resulting in complications of RASA1-related disorders have been reported, a theoretic consideration is avoidance of routine use of anticoagulants unless indicated for treatment of a different medical condition.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Clarification of the genetic status of at-risk relatives is appropriate in order to allow early diagnosis and treatment of AVMs/AVFs to reduce/avoid secondary adverse outcomes. In particular, at-risk infants are candidates for prompt diagnosis given the possible early presentation of neurologic complications from intracranial AVMs/AVFs [Revencu et al 2008]. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.