

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Roberts syndrome (RBS), the following evaluations are recommended: Radiographic documentation of the craniofacial, limb, and hand anomalies Orofacial and limb malformation assessment to determine the need for management and plastic surgery Ophthalmologic evaluation Echocardiogram or evaluation by cardiologist to assess for structural heart defects Ultrasound evaluation of the kidneys for cysts Multidisciplinary evaluation including psychological assessment and formal, age-appropriate developmental assessment Clinical genetics consultation Note: No published guidelines to evaluate the clinical manifestations contributing to morbidity and mortality exist. The recommendations given are based on the literature and the experience of clinical geneticists.

Treatment of Manifestations

 It has been suggested that most individuals with RBS are stillborn or die in infancy. However, it is important to emphasize that, because it is possible for individuals to have normal intelligence and a healthy psychological adjustment, even with all of the stigmata of RBS, such individuals should be managed in a way that allows each to improve their quality of life and to reach their full potential. Individuals with severe RBS who survive the newborn period face a number of medical problems, and management of these individuals usually requires more than one medical specialist; experts in pediatrics, genetics, ophthalmology, cardiology, nephrology, neurology, child development, rehabilitation, general surgery, orthopedics, or dentistry may be involved. Comprehensive medical intervention is suggested, as is complete and clear parental counseling when discussing the possible outcome for these individuals [Karabulut et al 2001]. Treatment is based on the affected individual’s specific needs and may include the following: Surgical treatments including cosmetic or reconstructive surgery for clefts of the lip and/or palate and for limb abnormalities (several surgeries are usually required). Hand surgery improves early and proper development of the prehensile grasp. Prostheses Speech assessment and therapy and aggressive treatment of otitis media if cleft palate is present Intervention and/or special education if developmental delays are detected Standard treatment for specific ophthalmologic problems, cardiac defects and renal dysfunction

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Periodic follow up to monitor mental and physical growth and to determine if frequent infections are an issue Regular follow up for assessment of speech and ear infections/hearing loss if cleft lip and palate are present Annual screening for developmental delays or learning disorders Monitoring as per specific ophthalmologic, cardiac, or renal anomalies

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.