http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/rcdp

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type I (RCDP1), the following evaluations are recommended: Full skeletal survey (with flexion and extension views of the neck) Ophthalmologic examination Growth parameters Developmental assessment MR imaging of brain (with MR spectroscopy) Cardiac ultrasound examination Renal ultrasound examination Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management is supportive and limited because of the multiple handicaps present at birth and the poor outcome. Cataract extraction may preserve some vision. Physical therapy is recommended to assist in the improvement of contractures; orthopedic procedures have improved function in some individuals.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Dietary restriction of phytanic acid to avoid the consequences of phytanic acid accumulation over time may benefit individuals with milder forms of RCDP.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Poor feeding and recurrent aspiration necessitate the placement of a gastrostomy tube. Note: Improved nutrition does not enhance linear growth. Individuals with RCDP1 require good pulmonary toilet and careful attention to respiratory function. Influenza vaccine and RSV monoclonal antibody should be provided. Low plasmalogen levels can be associated with low levels of docosohexanoic acid (DHA). DHA can be measured in plasma; oral supplementation should be provided if levels are low.

Surveillance

 Based on a retrospective review of the natural history of 35 individuals with RCDP, White et al [2003] provide health supervision guidelines for primary caretakers of children with RCDP, including the following: Growth curves that allow weight comparisons to help determine the need for gastrostomy The ages at which developmental milestones are achieved to provide realistic expectations Recommendations for medical assessments including seizure control, vision, hearing, orthopedic care, and prevention of respiratory infections and contractures

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Data suggest that oral plasmalogen supplementation using alkylglycerol sources can increase tissue plasmalogen concentrations in rodents and red blood cell (RBC) plasmalogen concentrations in individuals with Zellweger syndrome spectrum disorders. Anecdotal reports of alkylglycerol supplementation in a few individuals with classic RCDP1 have not indicated dramatic clinical benefit; however, alkylglycerol supplementation has not yet been studied in a systematic fashion. Studies in Pex7-deficient mouse models have shown that plasmalogen precursors can partially recover plasmalogen levels in body tissues, but not in brain [Brites et al 2004, Wood et al 2011] Nonsense suppressor drugs were unable to recover protein production in individuals with the common p.Leu292Ter allele [Dranchak et al 2011].