http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/refsum

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Refsum disease, the following evaluations are recommended: Ophthalmology. Examination for retinitis pigmentosa/miosis, cataract, and visual fields [Claridge et al 1992] Anosmia testing using the procedure described by Gibberd et al [2004] Neurology. Ataxia, neuropathy, myography, and electrophysiologic assessment Audiology. Pure tone audiometry and possibly otoacoustic emission testing and auditory brain stem evoked response (ABER) testing if hearing difficulties are suspected but not identified on pure tone audiometry [Bamiou et al 2003] Radiology. Physical examination of hands, feet, and knees; radiologic assessment of hands and feet Cardiology. Cardiac evaluation including electrocardiography (ECG) and cardiac ultrasound examination Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Chronic Treatment

The following are indicated: Dietary restriction of phytanic acid intake Avoidance of sudden weight loss Lifelong treatment with hydrating creams Regular care by a cardiologist for cardiac arrhythmias and cardiomyopathy in order to treat signs and symptoms properly with antiarrhythmic and cardiogenic supportive drugs Because the pupils do not dilate well if at all, other measures, such as use of iris hooks, may be necessary to allow sufficient pupillary enlargement during cataract surgery. In addition, an anterior chamber lens with iris fixation may be necessary because the brittleness of the zonular fibers holding the lens capsule may not allow positioning of an intraocular lens in the capsular bag after cataract removal, a complication observed in one patient [BP Leroy 2007, personal communication].

Treatment of Acute Presentation

Many acute features such as polyneuropathy, ataxia, ichthyosis, and cardiac arrhythmias resolve with reduction in plasma phytanic acid concentration (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations). Plasmapheresis or lipapheresis can be used in the event of acute arrhythmias or extreme weakness because phytanic acid is transported on lipoproteins [Wierzbicki et al 1999]. During plasmapheresis, cardiac monitoring should be continuous and plasma glucose concentration should be kept high to prevent onset or exacerbation of arrhythmias. A low phytanic acid diet can be given orally or by nasogastric tube. If oral intake is restricted, appropriate parenteral nutrition and fluid therapies are needed to maintain plasma glucose concentrations and prevent ketosis.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No curative therapy currently exists for Refsum disease. By restricting dietary intake of phytanic acid or eliminating phytanic acid by plasmapheresis or lipid apheresis, plasma phytanic acid concentrations can be reduced by 50% to 70%, typically to about 100 to 300 µmol/L. This reduction in plasma phytanic acid concentration successfully resolves symptoms of ichthyosis, sensory neuropathy, and ataxia in approximately that order. However, it is uncertain whether treatment affects the progression of the retinitis pigmentosa, anosmia, and deafness [Gibberd & Wierzbicki 2000]. Although data are limited, it appears that despite strict dietary treatment the retinitis pigmentosa is very slowly progressive [BP Leroy, unpublished observations]. A high-calorie diet is necessary to avoid mobilization of stored lipids, including phytanic acid, into the plasma. Postoperative care requires parenteral nutrition with solutions that do not contain phytanic acid, e.g., Intralipid® available in 10%, 20%, and 30% concentrations, which are all based on soybean oil and egg yolk phospholipid.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Treatment of hypertension may help in delaying cardiomyopathy, which inevitably leads to arrhythmias. It is probably better to avoid amiodarone as an anti-arrhythmic drug, because of the risk of hyperthyroidism, which results in catabolism and increased phytanic acid release from tissues if not recognized in time. This complication was observed in one individual [BP Leroy 2007, personal communication]. Once cardiomyopathy has become difficult to treat, cardiac transplantation can be life-saving. One individual with PHYH-related Refsum disease and one with PEX7-related Refsum disease have successfully received a donor heart [BP Leroy 2007 & 2015, personal observations].

Surveillance

The following are appropriate: Measurement of plasma phytanic acid levels every three to six months and more frequently during illnesses or increased stress that may lead to a catabolic state Annual ophthalmologic examination to identify vision loss resulting from cataracts, which are treatable Annual cardiac examination to identify cardiomyopathy and concomitant arrhythmias

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Avoid the following: All food products containing phytanic acid such as ruminant (cow, sheep, and goat) products and certain fish (cod) products. Some nuts should also be avoided [Brown et al 1993]. Fasting because stored lipids, including phytanic acid, are mobilized into the plasma Ibuprofen because it is metabolized by AMACR and may interfere with the metabolism of phytanic acid Amiodarone because of the risk that hyperthyroidism would induce enhanced catabolism, with consequent increase of plasma phytanic acid

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate sibs of a proband before symptoms of Refsum disease occur in order to institute early treatment to reduce plasma phytanic acid concentration. Evaluations include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known; Measurement of phytanic acid concentration in plasma or serum if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Because of the tendency for pregnancy to induce catabolism, it is extremely important to manage plasma phytanic acid concentration during pregnancy in women with Refsum disease. Fairly rapid reduction of visual fields has been observed during the third trimester of pregnancy [BP Leroy, unpublished observations], possibly due to increased plasma phytanic acid concentration resulting from increased catabolism.

Therapies Under Investigation

At present, the potential of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) similar to that for lysosomal storage diseases (e.g., Hurler syndrome [see MPS I], Fabry disease, and Gaucher disease) is under investigation. This may eventually replace dietary restrictions and plasma- or lipapheresis. In the long run, gene therapy may be the treatment of choice, but many issues need to be resolved before it can be applied. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.