

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with X-linked juvenile retinoschisis, the following evaluations are recommended: Visual acuity Goldmann visual field Family history Electroretinogram Funduscopic examination Optical coherence tomography Genetic counseling

Treatment of Manifestations

 Low-vision services are designed to benefit those whose ability to function is compromised by vision impairment. Low-vision specialists, often optometrists, help optimize the use of remaining vision. Services provided vary based on age and needs. Public school systems are mandated by federal law to provide appropriate education for children who have vision impairment. Assistance may include larger print textbooks, preferential seating in the front of the classroom, and use of handouts with higher contrast. Many individuals with X-linked juvenile retinoschisis are able to obtain a restricted driver's license. Some individuals have found specially designed telescopic lenses useful when driving; legal use of telescopic lenses may vary by locale. Retinoschisis affects primarily the inner retinal layers; hence, retinoschisis alone (without retinal detachment) is at best difficult to treat surgically.  Treatment of retinoschisis may require the care of a retinal surgeon to address the infrequent complications of vitreous hemorrhage and full-thickness retinal detachment. The clinical presentation of a large area of peripheral retinoschisis may mask a true retinal detachment. Advice from an ophthalmologist or retinal surgeon should be sought when in doubt.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Ambylopia prevention therapy is indicated following surgical intervention to treat vitreous hemorrhage or retinal detachment, or in cases of severe retinoschisis or hypermetropia [Medscape, accessed 8-21-14].

Surveillance

 Annual evaluation of children under age ten years by a pediatric ophthalmologist or retina specialist is recommended. Patient education and close follow-up are the only clinical options that may allow for early identification and treatment of vision-threatening complications [Orphanet, accessed 8-21-14].  Older children and adults need less frequent monitoring.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Although retinal detachment and vitreous hemorrhage occur in a minority of affected individuals (5%-22% and 4%-40%, respectively), general avoidance of head trauma and high-contact sports is recommended.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk male relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures.  If the RS1 pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives. If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, examination by an ophthalmologist can be used to clarify the affected status of at-risk relatives for early treatment of retinal detachment. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 A mouse model of human X-linked juvenile retinoschisis was studied to determine whether supplementation with functional normal retinoschisin protein can produce improvement in ERG function and retina morphology [Zeng et al 2004, Min et al 2005]. Subsequent evaluation of the mouse model confirmed that it appropriately mimics structural features of human X-linked juvenile retinoschisis. Replacements of the deficient protein through use of a neomycin resistance cassette or through use of an AAV vector were both successful, suggesting that, with additional study, gene therapy could become a viable strategy for therapeutic intervention [Kjellstrom et al 2007].  Other researchers showed that older mice had significantly reduced benefit from AAV Rs1h cDNA (the mouse ortholog of human RS1) gene transfer compared to younger mice that had rescue of retinal structure and function. These benefits along with retinoschisin expression persisted for over 15 months. Other studies showed that intravitreal injection of a rAAV8 vector containing the mouse Rs1h cDNA under the control of a human retinoschisin promoter in Rs1h knockout mice yielded strong retinoschisin expression and structural and functional improvements. Wildtype retinoschisin delivered and expressed in human retinal culture cells has been shown to undergo protein folding, subunit assembly, and secretion mostly independent of endogenously expressed, defective retinoschisin protein. This suggests that gene therapy could be possible for affected individuals who have residual, pathogenic RS1 protein expression [Molday et al 2012].  Byrne et al [2014] explained that cell targeting and appropriate vector choice are very important to the success of retinal gene therapy. This group demonstrated that different cell types were able to secrete retinoschisin, transporting the protein across the retina. Photoreceptor cell secretion of this protein produced the best long-term rescue.  Another therapeutic approach involves in vivo directed evolution of AAV variants to deliver the wildtype gene to the outer retina after injection to the vitreous humor of the eye. The authors suggested that this has the potential to be a broadly applicable gene delivery method for inherited retinal diseases [Dalkara et al 2013].  Possible drawbacks of using viral vectors (e.g., the risks of oncogenicity, immunogenicity, and the possible persistence of such vectors in the brain after intravitreal injection) have triggered an interest in non-viral systems. A combination of solid lipid nanoparticles, dextran, and protamine as well as EGFP and RS1 plasmids have been used to develop non-viral vectors for X-linked juvenile retinoschisis treatment. Researchers studied the in vitro transfection capacity, cellular uptake, and intracellular trafficking of these vectors in ARPE-19 cells. In vivo intravitreal, subretinal, and topical forms of vector administration in Wistar rat eyes were also evaluated. EGFP expression in various cell types depended on the administration route. This work suggests that these non-viral vectors may be useful in treating X-linked juvenile retinoschisis, other degenerative retinal diseases, and ocular surface diseases as well [Delgado et al 2012].  Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.