http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/rett

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with a MECP2-related disorder, the following evaluations should be considered: Formal developmental assessment Assessment of feeding/eating, digestive problems (including constipation and gastroesophageal reflux), and nutrition using history, growth measurements and, if needed, gastrointestinal investigations History of sleep and/or breathing problems Video/EEG monitoring to obtain definitive information about the occurrence of seizures and the need for antiepileptic drugs Screening for prolonged QTc by ECG and Holter monitoring Consider assessment of brain stem autonomic dysfunction to identify appropriate therapies, although this remains controversial [Julu et al 2001, Julu & Witt Engerström 2005] Examination for scoliosis Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 The treatment program needs to be individualized following an assessment of the affected individual’s clinical problems and needs. Management is mainly symptomatic and focuses on optimizing the individual's abilities using a dynamic multidisciplinary approach, with specialist input from dietitians, physiotherapists, and occupational, speech, and music therapists [Lotan et al 2004, Weaving et al 2005]. Psychosocial support for families is an integral part of management. Therapeutic horseback riding, swimming, and music therapy have been reported to be of benefit. Effective communication strategies, including the use of augmentative communication techniques, need to be explored for these severely disabled individuals [Ryan et al 2004]. Treatment for seizures needs to be individualized with input from a pediatric neurologist. Topiramate may improve seizure control and/or respiratory abnormalities [Goyal et al 2004]. Risperidone (low dose) or selective serotonin uptake inhibitors have been somewhat successful in treating agitation. Melatonin can ameliorate sleep disturbances [McArthur & Budden 1998]. Chloral hydrate, hydroxyzine, or diphenhydramine may be used along with melatonin. Ample fluid intake and a high-fiber diet can help prevent acute intestinal obstruction. When diet is ineffective, Miralax® (polyethylene glycol) and other stool softeners may be used to control constipation; they are tolerated better than milk of magnesia. Anti-reflux agents, smaller and thickened feedings, and positioning can decrease gastroesophageal reflux. Scoliosis [Kerr et al 2003] and spasticity need to be treated to maintain mobility. Recently, guidelines were developed for the management of scoliosis in Rett syndrome [Downs et al 2009] (full text). Some individuals known to have prolonged QTc may benefit from the use of β-blockers or cardiac pacing, in consultation with a specialist pediatric cardiologist.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Osteopenia may be avoided with careful attention to nutrition, particularly calcium intake.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Examination at regular intervals by a multidisciplinary team with particular attention to growth, nutritional intake, dentition, gastrointestinal function, mobility and communication skills, hand function, and orthopedic and neurologic complications Periodic ECG to screen for prolonged QTc Examination at regular intervals for the progression of scoliosis

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Because individuals with Rett syndrome have an increased risk of life-threatening arrhythmias associated with a prolonged QT interval, avoidance of drugs known to prolong the QT interval, including the following, is recommended: Prokinetic agents (e.g., cisapride) Antipsychotics (e.g., thioridazine), tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., imipramine) Antiarrhythmics (e.g., quinidine, sotolol, amiodarone) Anesthetic agents (e.g., thiopental, succinylcholine) Antibiotics (e.g., erythromycin, ketoconazole)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 A number of clinical trials are currently being conducted, including both observational and interventional studies. Phase I and II trials of parenteral administration of the tri-peptide form of insulin-like growth factor, rhIGF-1 (mecasermin [rDNA]), are currently underway. The tricyclic antidepressant desipramine (DMI) is currently in phase II studies, specifically focusing on the respiratory abnormalities associated with Rett syndrome. The NMDA receptor antagonist dextromethorphan (DM) is currently in trials targeting glutamate and NMDA receptor associated neuronal toxicity, and is focused on respiratory, seizure, and motor outcomes. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 The ketogenic diet has been tried in Rett syndrome with some improvement in seizure control and other modest subjective improvements [Haas et al 1986]. L-carnitine was tested in a double-blind trial. Although parents and caregivers reported improvements in the general well-being of individuals with Rett syndrome [Ellaway et al 1999], significant functional improvements were not observed. Carbidopa/levodopa may be tried for treatment of rigidity seen in Rett syndrome, but its benefit is unsubstantiated. Following the report of reduced CSF folate concentration in four females with Rett syndrome [Ramaekers et al 2003], Neul and colleagues analyzed CSF from an additional 76 individuals with Rett syndrome, but could not reproduce earlier findings, and found that supplementation with folinic acid did not lead to any noticeable clinical improvements [Neul et al 2005]. It therefore remains to be established whether cerebral folate deficiency contributes to the pathophysiology of Rett syndrome. Because elevated opioids had been observed in the CSF of individuals with Rett syndrome, the oral opiate antagonist, naltrexone, was investigated. Although it decreased breathing dysrhythmias and had some sedating properties, the efficacy of naltrexone is controversial [Percy et al 1994]. Based on the hypothesis that altering DNA methylation could improve global DNA methylation and thereby improve residual MeCP2 function, a trial of oral creatine has been undertaken. A statistical increase in global DNA methylation was seen. Improvement in the total and subscores of the Rett Syndrome Motor and Behavioral Assessment was observed, although it did not reach statistical significance [Freilinger et al 2011].