http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/rickets-xlh

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH), the following evaluations are recommended.


Children

A lower-extremity x-ray (teleoroentgenogram), and x-ray of the wrists to assess the extent of skeletal disease

Bone age measurement to evaluate growth potential

Craniofacial examination for signs of craniosynostosis

Dental examination

Hearing evaluation


Adults

X-ray of skeletal sites with reported pain to assess for possible enthesopathy or stress fractures

Dental examination

Hearing evaluation


Individuals of any age

Evaluation of those with headache and vertigo for Chiari malformation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Pharmacologic treatment focuses on improving pain and correcting bone deformation.

In children, treatment generally begins at the time of diagnosis and continues until long bone growth is complete.

Treatment for most children consists of oral phosphate administered three to five times daily and high-dose calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D. Two different regimens have been used, but have not been compared:

Low dose. Treatment is generally started at a low dose to avoid the gastrointestinal side effects of diarrhea and gastrointestinal upset. The doses are then titrated to a weight-based dose of calcitriol at 20 to 30 ng/kg/day administered in two to three divided doses and phosphate at 20 to 40 mg/kg/day administered in three to five divided doses [Carpenter et al 2011].

High dose. Some clinicians favor a high-dose phase of treatment for up to a year. The high-dose phase consists of calcitriol at 50-70 ng/kg/day (up to a maximum dose of 3.0 µg daily) along with the phosphate [Sabbagh et al 2014].

Doses are adjusted based on (1) evidence of therapeutic success including reduction in serum alkaline phosphatase activity, changes in musculoskeletal examination, improvement in radiographic rachitic changes, and (when possible) improved growth velocity; and (2) evidence of therapeutic complications including hyperparathyroidism, hypercalciuria, and nephrocalcinosis (see Prevention of Secondary Complications). Note: Normalization of the serum phosphate concentration is not a therapeutic goal as normal serum phosphate concentration frequently indicates overtreatment and increases the risk for treatment-related complications.

Jehan et al [2008] described differences in growth during treatment that are associated with different vitamin D receptor promoter haplotypes, providing a possible explanation for some of the clinical variability observed in XLH.

After growth is complete, lower doses of the medications can be used to reach the treatment goals.

In adults, the role of treatment has not been well studied; treatment is generally reserved for individuals with symptoms such as skeletal pain, upcoming orthopedic surgery, biochemical evidence of osteomalacia with an elevated alkaline phosphatase, or recurrent pseudofractures or stress fractures [Carpenter et al 2011]. The calcitriol doses that are frequently employed in adults are in the range of 0.50 to 0.75 µg daily; the phosphate is given as 750 to 1000 mg/day in three to four divided doses. As with children, the phosphate dose is slowly titrated to avoid gastrointestinal side effects, starting at 250 mg/day and titrating up by 250 mg/day each week until the final dose is reached.

Orthopedic treatment. Despite what appears to be adequate pharmacologic therapy (see following Note), some individuals have persistent lower-limb bowing and torsion, which may lead to misalignment of the lower extremity. In these individuals, surgical treatment is frequently pursued. No control trials of the different surgical techniques have been undertaken; the literature consists of case series. Note: Poor compliance with pharmacologic therapy during childhood and the teen years may be one factor for persistent lower-limb deformities.

In prepubertal children who have not yet reached their peak growth velocity (generally before age 10 years), stapling or toggle plate insertion can be considered as a minimally invasive method of reversible hemi-epiphysiodesis [Novais & Stevens 2006]. Note: The risk with this procedure is prematurely stopping growth.

In older children and adults, surgical techniques reported include distraction osteogenesis by external fixation, acute correction by external fixation with intramedullary nailing, internal fixation with intramedullary nailing, and acute correction by intramedullary nailing [Song et al 2006, Petje et al 2008].

Additionally, total hip and knee arthroplasty is sometimes required because of degenerative joint disease and enthesopathy. Treatment in adults has not been shown to influence enthesopathy [Connor et al 2015].

Craniofacial treatment. Although hypophosphatemic rickets is a rare condition, a recent review from three neurosurgical centers reported on ten patients treated over twenty years and recommended prompt referral to a craniofacial specialist when head shape abnormalities are seen in patients with this disorder [Vega et al 2016].

Dental treatment. Because individuals with XLH are susceptible to recurrent dental abscesses which may result in premature loss of decidual and permanent teeth, good oral hygiene with flossing and regular dental care and fluoride treatments are the cornerstones of prevention. Pit and fissure sealants have been recommended but have not been well studied. A recent study has suggested that treatment of adults with phosphate and calcitriol can improve the severity of dental disease [Connor et al 2015].

Sensorineural hearing loss has been reported in persons with XLH; individuals with this complication are treated in a standard manner. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview, Management.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



See Treatment of Manifestations, Pharmacologic treatment.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Hyperparathyroidism is associated with treatment for XLH. Rarely, hyperparathyroidism is present at the time of diagnosis; most often it occurs secondary to high phosphate doses and may proceed to tertiary hyperparathyroidism. In order to monitor for these complications, intact parathyroid hormone, serum calcium concentrations, and TmP/GFR should be measured quarterly (see Surveillance).

If secondary hyperparathyroidism is identified, either the calcitriol dose may be increased or the phosphate dose decreased. A small clinical trial and several case reports have investigated the use of cinacalcet in adults with XLH who have secondary hyperparathyroidism [Alon et al 2008]. No long-term studies have been conducted. The clinical trial (comprising 8 individuals ages 6-19) involved in-patient monitoring of phosphate, iPTH, and Tmp/GFR after a single dose of cinacalcet; results showed a decrease in iPTH and an increase in phosphate and TmP/GFR.

If tertiary hyperparathyroidism is identified, surgical evaluation is warranted.

Hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria may also complicate long-term treatment for XLH and is associated with high calcitriol doses. Serum calcium concentrations and urine calcium/creatinine ratio should be monitored quarterly (see Surveillance). If hypercalcemia or hypercalciuria is detected, the calcitriol dose should be decreased.

Nephrocalcinosis, reported in persons medically treated for XLH, may occur independent of hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria detected on laboratory evaluation. A baseline renal ultrasound examination should be performed at the start of treatment. The frequency of renal ultrasound examination to monitor for the development of nephrocalcinosis is not established; one- to five-year intervals have been recommended [Carpenter et al 2011, Sabbagh et al 2014].

Surveillance



Periodic clinical evaluation to assess for disease progression, treatment response, and therapeutic complications is indicated.

For individuals on calcitriol and phosphate therapy the following are recommended:

Quarterly monitoring of the following: serum concentrations of phosphate, calcium, and creatinine; alkaline phosphatase level; intact parathyroid hormone level; and urinary calcium, phosphate, and creatinine to identify and thus prevent therapeutic complications

Intermittent monitoring of lower-extremity x-rays (teleoroentgenograms) to assess skeletal response to treatment. The frequency has not been well established; although annual imaging can be considered, the decision for imaging should be based on symptoms and physical examination findings.

Renal ultrasound examination to assess for nephrocalcinosis. The frequency has not been well established.

Dental follow up twice a year (as for children and teenagers at high risk for caries)

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



It is recommended that treatment with unopposed phosphate (without 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D) be avoided as this is felt to increase the risk for hyperparathyroidism.

Although 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D has been used as a single agent, this use is felt to increase the risk for hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and nephrocalcinosis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Testing of at-risk infants and children is warranted to ensure early diagnosis and early treatment for optimal outcome.

Evaluation can be accomplished by:

Molecular genetic testing if the PHEX pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member;

Biochemical testing consisting of serum phosphorus, creatinine, calcium, alkaline phosphatase, intact parathyroid hormone, 25-hydroxy vitamin D [25(OH)D], and 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D concentrations and urine phosphorus and creatinine concentrations. Infants with initially normal test results require reevaluation every two to three months until at least age one year.

No role has been established for screening asymptomatic adult family members.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



No data on the use of phosphate and calcitriol in pregnant women with XLH are available. Most women with XLH who are on active therapy at the time of conception are continued on treatment throughout the pregnancy with vigilant monitoring of urinary calcium-to-creatinine ratios to detect hypercalciuria early in order to modify treatment accordingly. Those individuals who are not on therapy at the time of conception are generally not started on treatment during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation



Currently, a novel therapeutic agent KRN23 is under investigation for XLH. This is a recombinant human monoclonal antibody targeting FGF23 (see Molecular Genetics). A randomized trial of a single dose of KRN23 has shown an increase in the renal tubular threshold for phosphate reabsorption (TmP/GFR) and an increase in serum Pi and 1,25(OH)2D compared with placebo [Carpenter et al 2014]. A second study in adults looking at monthly dosing of KRN23 for 16 months demonstrated increases in serum phosphate, TmP/GFR, and 1,25 (OH)2D3 [Imel et al 2015]. Analysis from quality of life testing during the first four months of the trial showed improvements in physical functioning and stiffness [Ruppe et al 2016]. Phase II studies in adults and children with XLH are ongoing.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.