http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/rob-ad

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with autosomal dominant Robinow syndrome (ADRS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Radiographs of the limbs, chest, vertebrae and skull to establish the extent of skeletal involvement

Assessment for possible abnormal penile insertion/penoscrotal position for consideration of reconstructive surgery

Assessment for possible cryptorchidism

Clinical assessment for presence of cleft lip/palate and the need for surgical repair

Abdominal ultrasound examination for investigation of renal anomalies

Echocardiogram to evaluate for a cardiac defect

Endocrine consultation to assess the possibility of hormone therapy in the treatment of males with micropenis

Urology consultation in males with cryptorchidism and abnormal penile insertion/penoscrotal transposition for consideration of reconstructive surgery

Orthodontics consultation as needed for misaligned teeth or persistent primary dentition

Hearing assessment

Formal cognitive assessment if developmental delay is present

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Corrective surgeries may be required for repair of:

Cryptorchidism

Abnormal penile insertion/penoscrotal position

Cleft lip/palate

Hormone therapy may be helpful for males with micropenis. Injection of human chorionic gonadotropin and testosterone improved penile length and testicular volume in three boys with severe micropenis [Soliman et al 1998]. Hormone therapy should be initiated and monitored by a pediatric endocrinologist.

Orthodontic treatment is typically required.

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

Head circumference measurements every three months in infancy and every six months to one year thereafter

Developmental assessment every three months in infancy and every six months to one year thereafter, or more frequently as needed if delays identified

Dental evaluation every six months to one year or as recommended by the dental professional on initial assessment

Regular cardiac and renal assessment by respective specialists as needed if abnormalities are identified

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate the sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and surveillance. If the WNT5A or DVL1 pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Pregnancy in affected women appears to be generally uncomplicated. For an affected fetus, cæsarean section may be required for abnormal presentation and/or cephalopelvic disproportion. Breech presentation requiring cæsarean section has been reported in one case of ADRS [Roifman et al 2015].

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.