http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/rotor

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



In most cases an individual diagnosed with Rotor syndrome is the child of a consanguineous couple. Thus, the diagnosis of Rotor syndrome may coincidentally identify such consanguinity. In some centers, this may be an indication for clinical genetics consultation and/or genetic counseling.

Treatment of Manifestations



No treatment is required.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



No adverse drug effects have been documented in Rotor syndrome; however, the absence of the hepatic proteins OATP1B1 and OATP1B3 may have serious consequences for liver uptake and toxicity of numerous commonly used drugs and/or their metabolites which enter the liver via either of the two OATP1B transporters.

A list of drugs that enter the liver mainly via OATP1B1 and whose pharmacokinetics are known to be influenced by genetic variability in SLCO1B1 has been published [Niemi et al 2011]. Some of these drugs are also taken up by OATP1B3 [Shitara 2011]. The list includes:

Statins – simvastatin, atorvastatin, pravastatin, puitavastatin, rosuvastatin, fluvastatin

Ezetimibe

Anticancer drugs - methotrexate and irinotecan

Sartans – olmesartan and valsartan

Rifampicin

Mycophenolic acid

Torsemide

Thiazolidine diones – pioglitazone and rosiglitazone

Glinides – nateglinide and repaglinide

Lopinavir

Fexofenadine

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



No special pregnancy management issues from the perspective of an affected mother and/or from the perspective of an affected fetus are known.

Of note, during pregnancy the hyperbilirubinemia of Rotor syndrome may complicate the diagnosis and management of liver disease related to pregnancy (e.g., intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy) and liver disease not related to pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.