http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/rss

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Russell-Silver syndrome (RSS), the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment and plotting of growth curves. For European children, see Wollmann et al [1995]; for North American children, see the MAGIC Foundation. Physical examination for evaluation of possible limb-size asymmetry and oral and craniofacial abnormalities For most children with RSS, evaluation for growth hormone deficiency by standard methods For children with diaphoresis, evaluation for hypoglycemia For children suspected of having gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), evaluation for esophagitis including barium swallow studies, pH probe, and endoscopy Screening assessment of neurocognitive development, language, and muscle tone

Treatment of Manifestations

Growth. Children with any condition associated with body differences and/or short stature are often sensitive about body image. These factors can play a significant role in self-image, peer relationships, and socialization. Thus, psychological counseling is frequently helpful for children with RSS. Human growth hormone therapy in children with intrauterine growth retardation of all causes has significantly improved growth and final height [Albanese & Stanhope 1997, Azcona et al 1998, Czernichow & Fjellestad-Paulsen 1998, Saenger 2002]. Specifically, children with RSS have benefited from growth hormone supplementation even in the absence of growth hormone deficiency [Albanese & Stanhope 1997], including significant growth acceleration and improved final height [Azcona et al 1998] and continued normal growth rate after the discontinuation of growth hormone therapy [Azcona & Stanhope 1999]. Such treatment is best undertaken in a center with experience in managing growth disorders. One study demonstrated significant increase in height in children with RSS treated with growth hormone, but without a change in body or limb asymmetry [Rizzo et al 2001]. Children with RSS with UPD7 had more gain in height with growth hormone therapy compared to children with 11p15.5 epimutations possibly because children with 11p15.5 methylation abnormalities showed elevated levels of insulin-like growth factor II (product of IGF2); children with RSS with UPD7 had response characteristics similar to other children who were small for gestational age [Binder et al 2008]. A later study looking at both IGF1 and IGF binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) levels revealed no correlation between changes in the levels of these proteins and growth velocity after treatment with growth hormone; however, the diagnosis of RSS was based solely on clinical presentation and no data regarding testing for 11p15 methylation defects or maternal UPD7 were reported [Beserra et al 2010]. In a recent long term outcome study of 26 children with RSS treated with growth hormone for a median period of 9.8 years, a significant response was noted with median height of -2.7 SD at the beginning of therapy and a median height of -1.3 SD at the conclusion of therapy [Toumba et al 2010]. Unfortunately it is difficult to interpret the results of many studies of children with RSS who have received growth hormone, given the known genetic heterogeneity of the disorder and lack of etiologic data included in these studies. Also, it will be important to look at the long-term effects of growth hormone therapy on children with RSS, especially with respect to influence on final adult height and any possible changes in orthopedic management for those individuals with limb-length asymmetry. Growth hormone deficiency. Treatment with human growth hormone is necessary in the presence of documented growth hormone deficiency. Skeletal abnormalities. Lower-limb length discrepancy exceeding 3 cm can lead to compensatory scoliosis and thus requires intervention. Initial treatment is use of a shoe lift. In older children, distraction osteogenesis or epiphysiodesis can be considered. 
Neurodevelopment For infants with hypotonia, referral to an early-intervention program and physical therapist For children with evidence of delay, referral for early intervention and speech and language therapy For school-age children, working with the school system to address learning disabilities through appropriate neuropsychological testing and an individualized educational plan Hypoglycemia should be treated in a standard manner with dietary supplementation, frequent feedings, and use of complex carbohydrates. Gastrointestinal disorders should be aggressively managed. Treatment of gastroesophageal reflux initially with positioning and thickened feeds is recommended along with use of acid blocking medications (preferably proton pump inhibitors such as omeprazole or patoprazole) as needed. Surgical management with fundoplication may be necessary in more severe cases or in instances in which conservative measures are unsuccessful. Feeding aversion can be addressed with therapy by a speech pathologist and/or occupational therapist. Craniofacial anomalies. For those children with severe micrognathia or cleft palate, management by a multidisciplinary craniofacial team is recommended. Orthognathic surgery is rarely required. Dental hygiene and dental crowding can be appropriately managed in a routine manner by pediatric dentists and orthodontists. 
Genitourinary abnormalities Referral of males with cryptorchidism to a urologist; surgery as required Referral of males with micropenis to an endocrinologist; androgenic hormone therapy as indicated Neoplasia. The risk for malignancies in individuals with RSS is low. Although body asymmetry may be present, it appears not to be hemihypertrophy, as seen in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome; therefore, routine serial abdominal and renal sonograms are not indicated for children with RSS.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate: Monitoring of growth with special attention to growth velocity In infancy and in older children with diaphoresis or poor appetite, monitoring of blood glucose concentration for hypoglycemia At each well-child visit in early childhood, examination and measurement of limb-length discrepancy Close monitoring of speech and language development

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.