http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/rts

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Rothmund-Thomson syndrome (RTS), the following evaluations are recommended: Baseline skeletal radiographic examination by age five years to identify underlying skeletal abnormalities Baseline complete blood count with differential Ophthalmologic examination to evaluate for cataracts Dermatologic evaluation Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Dermatologic. Pulsed dye laser has been used for cosmetic management of the telangiectatic component of the rash [Potozkin & Geronemus 1991]. Hematologic. Individuals with clinical evidence of anemia or cytopenias should be evaluated by CBC and bone marrow biopsy if clinically indicated. Cataract. Visually significant cataracts require surgical removal. Cancer. Affected individuals who develop cancer should be treated according to standard chemotherapy and/or radiation regimens. Doses should be modified only if the individual experiences significantly increased toxicities.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Avoidance of excessive sun exposure and use of sunscreens with both UVA and UVB protection are recommended to prevent skin cancer. Calcium and vitamin D supplements may also be warranted in individuals with osteopenia or a history of fractures.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Annual evaluation by a physician familiar with RTS Monitoring of growth For individuals without cataracts, yearly eye examinations for screening purposes Prompt skeletal radiographic examination when clinical suspicion of osteosarcoma is present (including bone pain, swelling, or an enlarging lesion on a limb) due to the high risk for this potentially lethal malignancy, particularly for those individuals with pathogenic deleterious variants in RECQL4 Frequent monitoring for any evidence of malignancy in affected family members of individuals with RTS and osteosarcoma (because of reports of more than one sib with RTS also developing osteosarcoma) Close monitoring of the skin for lesions with unusual color or texture, as individuals with RTS are at increased risk for skin cancers

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Exposure to heat or sunlight may exacerbate the rash in some individuals. Avoidance of excessive sun exposure decreases the risk for skin cancer.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Given the theoretic potential for tumorigenesis, growth hormone (GH) therapy is not recommended for individuals who have normal GH levels. For individuals with documented GH deficiency, routine treatment with growth hormone is appropriate.