

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with SAMD9L-related ataxia-pancytopenia (ATXPC) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed: Medical history and physical examination including neurologic examination Brain MRI examination and referral to a neurologist Complete blood count with differential Referral to a hematologist/oncologist; bone marrow examination including chromosome 7-targeted FISH if hematologic abnormalities are more than minimal Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 
            Hematologic manifestations
           Management of hematologic impairment is based on the severity of cytopenias and consists of red cell or platelet transfusions as needed. Evaluate and treat for unrelated causes of anemia such as iron and vitamin deficiencies. Marrow transplantation for myelodysplasia was successful in two individuals to date. Note: There are no data to support use of erythropoietin or granulocyte-stimulating factor in SAMD9L-related ATXPC syndrome; these growth factors may increase the risk for myelodysplasia and myeloid leukemia. Neurologic manifestations. Management of ataxia is supportive, as there is no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease. Individuals should continue to be active and use canes and walkers to prevent falls. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary. Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Complete blood count annually. If cytopenias are identified these should be monitored more frequently. Patient/family education to seek prompt clinical evaluation if any signs or symptoms suggestive of hematopoietic cytopenia develop (e.g., fatigue, pallor, unexpected bleeding, recurrent infections). Annual evaluation of gait, coordination, and speech.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, anticoagulants, and thrombolytic agents are contraindicated if thrombocytopenia is present and should be used with caution given the fluctuating nature of the cytopenias. Avoid consuming alcohol and medications that cause sedation, which can increase problems with gait and coordination.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the SAMD9L pathogenic variant in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from hematologic surveillance and prompt initiation of treatment for severe cytopenias and myelodysplasia. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 There is no information of the effect of pregnancy on manifestations of SAMD9L-related ATXPC syndrome. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, or neutropenia may increase the risk of pregnancy complications.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.