http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sca-io

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with infantile-onset spinocerebellar ataxia (IOSCA), the following are recommended: Neurologic examination to evaluate the grade of ataxia and neuropathy Audiologic examination to evaluate the grade of hearing deficit and need for hearing aids Ophthalmologic examination to evaluate the grade of ophthalmoparesis and optic atrophy 
                Neurophysiologic examinations ENMG (electroneuromyography) SEP (somatosensory evoked potentials). Note: Changes in SEP occur early in the disease course and correlate with sensory system involvement. VEP (visual evoked potentials) Neuroimaging. Brain MRI Other. Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment is symptomatic: Deafness. Hearing aids, speech therapy, and sign language to support social adaptation and prevent educational problems in children with IOSCA. Computers may be a valuable aid in support of communication and learning. Sensory axonal neuropathy. Physiotherapy and orthoses to prevent foot and spine deformity; supportive shoes, splints, and braces; orthopedic surgery for foot deformities (pes cavus) and spine deformities (scoliosis); foot care to treat calluses and ulcerations Ataxia. A walker, wheelchair, physiotherapy, occupational therapy Epilepsy. Conventional antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) (phenytoin and phenobarbital) are ineffective in most patients [Lönnqvist et al 2009]. Some patients have benefited from lamotrigine or levetiracetam. Benzodiazepines, especially midazolam-infusion, when started early in status epilepticus, were occasionally effective. Oxcarbazepine has some effect, but hyponatremia is a troublesome side effect. Psychiatric symptoms. Antipsychotics (neurolepts, risperidone, olanzpine) to prevent psychotic behavior and antidepressants (SSRIs) for severe depression

Surveillance

 
            Small children Neurologic, audiologic, and ophthalmologic evaluation every six to 12 months Neurophysiologic studies when clinically indicated Brain MRI every three to five years 
            Adolescents and adults Neurologic examination annually Audiologic and ophthalmologic examinations every one to two years EEG and brain MRI at least during status epilepticus

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Valproate is contraindicated in patients with IOSCA, as it is in other disorders that potentially affect mitochondrial function in liver. Valproate caused significant elevation of liver enzymes (alanine aminotransferase [ALAT] 232 units/L [normal: 10-35 U/L] and gamma-GT [GGT] 160 U/L [normal: 5-50 U/L]) and icterus with elevated bilirubin levels (total: 224 µmol/L [normal: 5-25 µmol/L]; conjugated: 160 µmol/L [normal:1-8 µmol/L]) in one patient, and similar elevation of liver transaminases in another. When valproate was discontinued, icterus disappeared and the liver enzymes normalized.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.