http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sca13

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 13 (SCA13), the following evaluations are recommended: Medical history Neurologic examination EEG Formal neuropsychological tests for individuals with problems in learning and social adaptation Speech pathology evaluation if dysarthria is atypical or severe enough to cause communication problems. For individuals with frequent choking or severe dysphagia, speech pathology evaluation may be important in assessing aspiration risks.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Epileptic seizures can be improved by treatment with anticonvulsive medications. Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals should maintain activity. Canes and walkers help prevent falls. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary. Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence. Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria. When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration. Note: Tremor-controlling drugs are not effective for cerebellar tremors.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 No dietary factor has been shown to curtail symptoms; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced. Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation.

Surveillance

 Evaluation by a neurologist is indicated annually, or more often in the event of an acute exacerbation.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Alcohol and sedating drugs can exacerbate ataxia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Weight gain during pregnancy can further impair gait ataxia.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.