http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sca10

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 10 (SCA10), the following evaluations are recommended: MRI. The extent of cerebellar atrophy on serial MRI studies may be useful for documenting the progression of the disease. EEG. EEG is of particular importance, as many individuals with SCA10 develop epilepsy and epilepsy-related deaths have been recognized [Grewal et al 2002]. Nerve conduction tests. Nerve conduction studies are needed only when affected individuals have clinical evidence of polyneuropathy. Neuropsychological tests. Formal neuropsychological tests are appropriate for individuals with problems in learning and social adaptation. Speech pathology evaluation may be needed if dysarthria is atypical or severe enough to cause communication problems. For individuals with frequent choking or severe dysphagia, speech pathology evaluation may be important in assessing aspiration risks. 
Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Control of seizures is the most important management issue, as uncontrolled seizures may lead to potentially fatal status epilepticus. Conventional anticonvulsants such as phenytoin, carbamazepine, and valproic acid achieve reasonable control, although occasional breakthrough seizures may occur. When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration. Severe dysphagia may require percutaneous placement of a gastric tube for prevention of aspiration and maintenance of nutritional intake. Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility. Although not specifically studied in SCA10, intensive coordinative training has shown sustainable improvements in motor performance in individuals with degenerative ataxias [Ilg et al 2009, Ilg et al 2010]. Canes and walkers help prevent falling. Modification of the home with grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary. Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria. Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

No therapy is known to delay or halt the progression of the disease. No drugs have been proven to provide symptomatic relief of ataxia; however, minor tranquilizers may show some benefits in motor coordination in those persons who experience anxiety.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

No dietary factor that curtails symptoms has been documented; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly for those with poor nutritional status. Falls and aspiration are two major threats to individuals with ataxia, including those with SCA10. Walking aids and proactive plans for feeding strategies are useful.

Surveillance

Follow-up outpatient clinical evaluation every four to six months is indicated to identify early signs of potential complications and to adjust anticonvulsant treatments.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Alcohol and drugs known to adversely affect cerebellar functions should be avoided. Falls should be avoided because resulting injuries may greatly compromise motor function and the ability to perform activities of daily living. Any activities that are potentially dangerous to individuals with ataxia or epilepsy should be avoided, depending on the severity of the manifestations.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

At-risk individuals should be aware of the possibility of inducing ataxia during pregnancy or puerperium [Teive et al 2011a]. Epilepsy should be managed during pregnancy according to the American Academy of Neurology Practice Parameter Update: Management issues for women with epilepsy (an evidence-based review).

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Although taltirelin hydrate is widely used for symptomatic treatment of ataxia in Japan, it has never been used for individuals with SCA10. Tremor-controlling drugs, such as beta blockers and primidone, are ineffective for cerebellar tremors.