

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 15 (SCA15), the following evaluations are recommended: Clinical evaluation MRI to determine the pattern and extent of cerebellar atrophy and confirm the absence of extracerebellar changes Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Education for affected individuals and their families is the cornerstone of management. Physical and occupational therapy, as used for ataxic syndromes of any etiology, may be employed. Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals should maintain activity. To date significant dysphagia has not been an issue for individuals with SCA15; however, if significant dysphagia were to develop, a speech pathologist expert in the management of neurogenic dysphagia should be asked to help guide management.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Secondary complications are unlikely in the early years of the disease. Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility. Later, risk of falls can be reduced via appropriate gait aids and home modifications; if falls are frequent, a personal alarm system may be required. To limit the likelihood of fractures resulting from falls, bone density should be estimated and osteoporosis treated if present.

Surveillance

 Follow up by a neurologist with consultation from physiatrists and physical and occupational therapists every two or three years is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Because individuals with ataxic syndromes in general have abnormal sensitivity to the motor effects of alcohol, it is reasonable to limit alcohol intake to lessen the risk of falls.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Treatment of symptomatic tremor has not been reported in SCA15. At least in the Australian pedigrees, tremor did not cause major functional disability.