http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sca17

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17), the following evaluations are recommended: Neuropsychological testing to evaluate for dementia and/or psychiatric disturbance Brain MRI to evaluate areas and degree of atrophy Neurology consultation, if not completed prior to initial diagnosis Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 The following are appropriate: Treatment of psychiatric problems with appropriate psychotropic medications Treatment of seizures with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) Adaptation of environment and care to the level of dementia Treatment of dystonia with local injections of botulinum toxin

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 The side effects of psychotropic medications and AEDs (e.g., depression, sedation, nausea, restlessness, headache, neutropenia, and tardive dsykinesia) can be major secondary complications in persons with SCA17. For some individuals, the side effects of certain therapeutics may be worse than the symptoms of the disease; such individuals may benefit from total or intermittent discontinuation of the treatment or reduction in dose.

Surveillance

 Affected individuals should be followed annually or semiannually by a neurologist or more frequently if symptoms are progressing rapidly, as may happen in the advanced stages [Toyoshima et al 2004].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Agents with sedative/hypnotic properties, such as ethanol or certain medications, may markedly increase incoordination.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Affected women may be on medications (e.g., antiepileptics) to control the symptoms of SCA17. Because some medications can have adverse effects on the developing fetus, a thorough discussion of the medical benefits vs. risks to the fetus of such medications before pregnancy (or, in the case of an unplanned pregnancy, immediately after pregnancy is determined) is appropriate.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.