http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sca14

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 (SCA14), the following evaluations are recommended: Medical history Neurologic examination Brain MRI Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Axial myoclonus may be improved by clonazepam or valproic acid [Yamashita et al 2000]. Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals should continue to be active. Canes and walkers help prevent falls. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary. Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence. Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria. When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagram can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 No dietary factor has been shown to curtail symptoms; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced. Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Surveillance

 Gait, coordination, and speech should be evaluated annually.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Alcohol and sedation may make gait and coordination worse.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Tremor-controlling drugs do not work well for cerebellar tremors.