http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sca1

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual with molecularly confirmed spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1), the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed: Neurologic examination Video esophagram in those with dysphagia to determine the consistency of food that is least likely to trigger aspiration Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management of individuals with SCA1 remains supportive, as no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease exists. Affected persons should be followed by a neurologist with consultation from physiatrists, physical and occupational therapists, and other specialists as needed. Studies have shown that intensive rehabilitation (or coordinative physiotherapy) improves motor function in a heterogeneous group of individuals with various types of cerebellar degeneration [Ilg et al 2009, Ilg et al 2010, Miyai et al 2012]. Although these studies did not include individuals with SCA1, intensive coordinative training may be recommended for persons with SCA1 because of symptom improvement with limited adverse events. However, further studies that include individuals with SCA1 will need to be performed to determine the efficacy of such training. Canes and walkers help prevent falls. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary. Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria. Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence. Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility. Repeated aspiration or significant weight loss may point to the need for a feeding device in some.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 See Therapies Under Investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Certain manifestations indirectly related to the disease such as spasticity, depression, and pain may require appropriate pharmacotherapy. Vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Surveillance

 Neurologic evaluation every three to six months is appropriate

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Affected individuals should avoid alcohol as well as medications known to be neurotoxic such as those that cause neuropathy (e.g., isoniazid, large-dose vitamin B6) or those associated with central nervous system toxicity (e.g., diphenylhydantoin). Circumstances that could lead to physical harm, such as operating machinery or climbing to great heights, should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Lithium [Watase et al 2007] and insulin-like growth factor 1 [Vig et al 2006] have improved neurologic function in a mouse model of SCA1; no human trials with insulin-like growth factor 1 have been done to date. Metabolomics data using the mouse model of SCA1 showed that lithium restores purine metabolism in the cerebellum [Perroud et al 2013]. A human Phase I trial of oral lithium has been completed as an intramural NIH study; results have not been published (NCT00683943). A similar trial for SCA2 did not lead to any significant difference in the SARA score, but was well tolerated and did lead to a reduction in the Beckman depression inventory scale (BDI-II). Riluzole has been shown to provide some symptomatic relief of ataxia in a mixed group of individuals including persons with SCA1 [Ristori et al 2010, Romano et al 2015]; however, further investigation is needed, particularly longer-term disease-specific trials. An eight-week double-blind randomized placebo control trial of riluzole prodrug BHV4157 is ongoing (NCT02960893). Chronic treatment with 3,4-diaminopyridine had beneficial effects in a mouse model of SCA1 [Hourez et al 2011]; Giordano et al [2013] subsequently treated 16 individuals with chronic cerebellar ataxia (including 3 with SCA1) with 4-aminopyridine (4-AP). This open-label case series suggested modest short-term improvement in ataxia. Similarly, an open-label case series of 13 persons with cerebellar ataxia, including one with SCA1, who were treated with acetyl-DL-leucine (5 g/day) for one week suggested modest improvement of ataxia without side effects [Strupp et al 2013]. Similar encouraging results have also been observed in a follow-up four-week case series by the same group [Schniepp et al 2016]. However, randomized placebo-controlled studies will be needed to assess the efficacy of such treatment. The protocols for these studies are now being formulated [Feil et al 2017]. Cvetanovic et al [2011] reported that mutated Atxn1 repressed transcription of vascular endothelial growth factor A (Vegfa) in mice with SCA1; the mice showed a decrease in cerebellar microvessel density and length. Overexpression or pharmacologic infusion of Vegfa resulted in phenotypic improvement and decreased cerebellar pathology. Intrathecal injection of 3,000 mesenchymal stem cells in SCA1 transgenic mice mitigated the cerebellar neuronal disorganization, atrophy of dendrites, and motor function [Matsuura et al 2014, Nakamura et al 2015]. Investigators at the General Hospital of Chinese Armed Police Forces is recruiting study subjects with hereditary cerebellar ataxia for clinical trials using umbilical stem cell therapy (NCT01489267). SCA1 mice (Atxn1 with 154Gln residues) showed no improvements in motor function on the accelerating rotor-rod test after acute doses of riluzole, amantadine, zolpidem, and buspirone over two days [Nag et al 2013]. Downregulation of several molecules of the RAS-MAPK-MSK1 pathway decreases ataxin1 levels and suppresses neurodegeneration in Drosophila and murine models of SCA1. Pharmacologic inhibitors of this pathway also decrease ataxin1 levels, suggesting that these components represent therapeutic targets in SCA1 [Park et al 2013]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Tremor-controlling drugs do not work well for cerebellar tremors.