http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sca20

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 20 (SCA20), the following evaluations are recommended: Careful clinical and neurologic evaluation Speech assessment

Treatment of Manifestations

 Affected persons should be followed by a neurologist with consultation from physiatrists and physical and occupational therapists. Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals should maintain activity. Canes and walkers help prevent falls. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary. Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria or dysphonia. Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence. Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility. When dysphagia becomes troublesome, videofluoroscopic swallow evaluation can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Secondary complications are unlikely in the early years of the disease. Later, prevention of falls via appropriate gait aids and home modifications, and (if falls are frequent) a personal alarm system may be required. To limit the likelihood of fractures resulting from falls, bone density should be estimated and osteoporosis treated if present. Vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced. Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Periodic speech assessment if dysphagia becomes a problem Routine follow up with a neurologist about every two years or as needed

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Affected individuals should avoid alcohol as well as medications known to cause nerve damage (e.g., isoniazid).

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Tremor-controlling drugs do not work well for cerebellar tremors. Education for affected individuals and their families is the cornerstone of management.