http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sca2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2), the following are recommended: Neurologic examination Ophthalmologic examination Baseline assessment of cognition Neuroimaging Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management of individuals remains supportive as no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease exists. Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals should maintain activity. Canes and walkers help prevent falls. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary. Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria. Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence. When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration. Improvement of severe tremor with thalamic stimulation has been reported in one individual [Pirker et al 2003]. Another individual showed improvement with stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus [Freund et al 2007].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 No dietary factor has been shown to curtail symptoms; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced. Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Surveillance

 Affected individuals should be examined at least annually by a physician experienced in movement disorders and ataxia.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Alcohol and medications known to affect cerebellar function should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Tremor-controlling drugs do not work well for cerebellar tremors.