http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sca36

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 36 (SCA36) the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic examination with appropriate scoring protocols: SARA (Scale for the Assessment and Rating of Cerebellar Ataxia) is used to monitor disease severity. The mini-mental state examination (MMSE) may be sufficient for the initial neurologic check-up; however, other cognitive tests more specifically directed to evaluate frontal-subcortical functions may be more appropriate as the disease progresses. Examination by an otolaryngologist and audiologist, with emphasis in a comprehensive characterization of degree and anatomic level of hearing dysfunction. Clinical genetics consultation and genetic counseling Additional brain MRI is not necessary following the diagnosis of SCA36; however, it can be used for complementary follow-up evaluation.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Specific treatment for SCA36 is currently not available. The therapeutic approach should be multidisciplinary and include the following: Physical and occupational therapy to improve gait, balance, and fine motor coordination. Special attention should be paid to activities of daily life. Regular physical exercise and weight control to reduce the effect of future balance and walking problems Walking aids to facilitate ambulation and mobility. The use of a wheelchair is rare; however, it may be necessary in advanced disease stages. Living space may need to be adapted to help with accessibility. Speech therapy and communication devices for those with dysarthria Dietary assessment and feeding therapy programs to improve dysphagia and reduce the risk of aspiration Depending on the severity of hearing loss and the relative impairment at different levels of the auditory tract, consideration of hearing aids on a case by case basis. The utility of cochlear implants in SCA36 is unknown; however, they have been proposed for central auditory impairment in other neurodegenerative ataxias [Frewin et al 2013]. Audiologic rehabilitation and speech therapy can help improve the ability to distinguish words and speech patterns from background sounds, while also taking into account the dysarthria in the therapy program. Management of emotional and cognitive decline through cognitive therapy, treatment of depression, and psychological support.

Surveillance

 The following routine monitoring is recommended after a diagnosis of SCA36 has been confirmed. At least annual evaluation by a neurologist or more frequently if symptoms are progressing Annual or bi-annual evaluation by an otolaryngologist to detect or monitor hearing loss Surveillance of speech and ambulation In presymptomatic individuals who tested positive for the NOP56 expansion, it is appropriate to start surveillance of neurologic status and hearing by age 40-45 years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Alcohol, as well as drugs with possible side effects on cerebellar function (e.g., phenytoin, carbamazepine, metronidazole, amiodarone, lithium), or the inner ear (e.g., salicilates) Environmental noise at work and in everyday life (e.g., listening to loud music or videos directly through headphones)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.