http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sca3

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3), also known as Machado-Joseph disease (MJD), the following evaluations are recommended if specific symptoms are present: MRI of the brain and spinal cord if there are cognitive problems or unusually severe ataxia, motor, or sensory findings Speech and swallowing assessment if dysarthria and/or dysphagia are present Gait assessment EMG/NCV if peripheral symptoms are present to assess the degree of involvement of the peripheral nervous system Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of individuals with SCA3 remains supportive as no medication has been proven to slow the course of disease [D’Abreu et al 2010]. However, some symptoms may respond –in some cases dramatically – to certain drugs: In particular, the extrapyramidal syndromes resembling parkinsonism may benefit from levodopa or dopamine agonist [Subramony et al 1993, Nandagopal & Moorthy 2004]. Symptoms of restless legs syndrome may respond to these agents. Other manifestations, including spasticity, drooling, and sleep problems, also respond variably to appropriate agents such as lioresal, atropine-like drugs, and hypnotic agents. Botulinum toxin has been used for dystonia and spasticity [Freeman & Wszolek 2005]. Daytime fatigue, a common problem in individuals with SCA3, may respond to psychostimulants used in narcolepsy such as modafinil. Depression is common in individuals with SCA3 and should be treated with antidepressants [Cecchin et al 2007]. A trial of occupational therapy in SCA3 showed that depression scores improved as a consequence of therapy, underscoring the fact that non-pharmacologic measures may also improve affective disorder in SCA3 [Silva et al 2010]. Clik here (pdf) for a review of clinical trials of medications that have not shown a definite benefit for those with SCA3. Non-pharmacologic therapy is important in SCA3: Although neither exercise nor physical therapy slows the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, affected individuals should maintain activity. Canes and walkers help prevent falling, and motorized scooters later in disease can help maintain independence. Intensive coordinative training or a course of combined physical and occupational therapy focused on gait and incoordination can lead to symptomatic improvement [Ilg et al 2009, Miyai et al 2012] Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria. When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary. Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced. Regular physical activity is recommended to help retain gait and coordination in the setting of a progressive degenerative disease. Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility. General anesthesia may be problematic; experience with local anesthesia has been reported [Teo et al 2004].

Surveillance

Speech, swallowing, and gait function should be monitored annually or biannually to assess need for assistive devices.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.