

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 7 (SCA7), the following evaluations are recommended: Medical history Neurologic examination Ophthalmologic examination including assessment of visual acuity, visual fields, and color vision Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management of affected individuals remains supportive as no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease exists. Cerebellar ataxia. Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination or muscle weakness, individuals with spinocerebellar ataxia type 7 (SCA7) should maintain activity. Canes and walkers help prevent falls. Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary. Speech therapy and communication devices such as writing pads and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria. Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain a sense of independence. When dysphagia becomes troublesome, video esophagrams can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration. Note: Tremor-controlling drugs do not work well for cerebellar tremors. Retinal degeneration. Use of sunglasses and limitation of UV exposure are encouraged in order to limit damage to the retina. Various optical aids have been proposed for individuals with peripheral visual loss and preserved central vision, although all have drawbacks. Low vision aids such as magnifiers and closed circuit television may provide useful reading vision for individuals with reduced central acuity and constricted visual fields. Wide-field, high-intensity flashlights produce a bright wide beam of light and improve the nighttime mobility of individuals with retinal degeneration. They are inexpensive and allow binocular viewing, but are large, heavy, and conspicuous.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 No dietary factor has been shown to curtail symptoms; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced. Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Surveillance

 Routine follow up by an ophthalmologist is appropriate to measure visual acuity and visual fields and to help identify appropriate visual aids.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes. 
            Pregnancy Management Walking during pregnancy may be more difficult than usual because of the ataxia.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Scholefield et al [2009] have suggested allele-specific RNA interference as a therapeutic approach for SCA7. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.