http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sca8

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia type 8 (SCA8), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic assessment, including neuroimaging (brain MRI or CT)

Assessment of the family pedigree and the disease course in other affected family members to aid in establishing a clinical prognosis

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Use of canes and walkers helps prevent falls.

Modification of the home with such conveniences as grab bars, raised toilet seats, and ramps to accommodate motorized chairs may be necessary.

Speech therapy, communication devices such as writing pads, and computer-based devices may benefit those with dysarthria.

Weighted eating utensils and dressing hooks help maintain some degree of independence.

When dysphagia becomes troublesome, a video esophagram can identify the consistency of food least likely to trigger aspiration.

Although neither exercise nor physical therapy has been shown to stem the progression of incoordination, individuals with SCA8 should try to remain active in order to maintain their muscular and cardiopulmonary conditioning.

Weight control is important because obesity can exacerbate difficulties with ambulation and mobility.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Management of affected individuals remains supportive, as there is no known therapy to delay or halt the progression of the disease.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



No dietary factor has been shown to curtail symptoms; however, vitamin supplements are recommended, particularly if caloric intake is reduced.

Surveillance



Affected individuals should regularly visit a neurologist familiar with the ataxia syndromes to identify potential complications that develop over time and to manage clinical challenges associated with decreased mobility and exercise or difficulties with speech and swallowing.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Alcohol should be avoided because it can exacerbate problems with incoordination.

Affected individuals should get plenty of rest; symptoms are often aggravated by fatigue.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Tremor-controlling drugs do not work well for cerebellar tremors.