http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/scad

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SCAD) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended: Carnitine levels. Total and free carnitine levels can be used to detect free carnitine deficiency; however, carnitine levels are usually normal in individuals with SCAD deficiency. Urine organic acids; used to detect ethylmalonic acid (EMA) during acute illnesses Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Since most individuals with SCAD deficiency are asymptomatic, the need for treatment when well is unclear. Given the paucity of research, especially long-term follow up studies, there are no generally accepted recommendations for dietary manipulation or the use of carnitine and/or riboflavin supplementation in SCAD deficiency. However, since the risk for episodes of metabolic decompensation is increased above background risk, increased alertness for dehydration, metabolic acidosis, and/or hypoglycemia during times of otherwise minor illness is prudent. Basic management of acute metabolic acidosis should be similar to that for other fatty acid oxidation disorders: promoting anabolism and providing alternative sources of energy, both of which can be accomplished by administration of intravenous fluids with high dextrose concentrations with or without insulin. Usually 10% dextrose is given at a rate to provide 8-10 mg/kg/min of glucose. This approach is especially important if nausea and vomiting prevent the oral intake of fluids. Hypoglycemia is uncommon but can be treated in the same fashion as acute metabolic acidosis. Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) is an essential cofactor for SCAD function. Thus, riboflavin (vitamin B2) supplementation has been suggested as a possible therapy for SCAD deficiency. In one study, a Dutch cohort of 16 individuals with confirmed SCAD deficiency and at-risk genotypes (biallelic for pathogenic variants; compound heterozygous for pathogenic variant and a susceptibility variant; biallelic for susceptibility variants) were treated with riboflavin 10 mg/kg/day for a maximum dose of 150 mg divided three times daily [van Maldegem et al 2010b]. FAD levels were within normal range in all individuals throughout the study, though they were the lowest in the subgroups with genotypes that were either compound heterozygous for pathogenic variant and susceptibility variant or biallelic for a susceptibility variant. Plasma levels of C4-C (butrylcarnitine) remained essentially unchanged throughout the study period across all subgroups. Urine EMA levels decreased only in the subgroup of compound heterozygotes for pathogenic variant and susceptibility variant. Four of 16 demonstrated biochemical changes and exhibited clinical improvement per parent report. Of note, these four individuals had the lowest baseline FAD levels and maintained biochemical and clinical improvements even after riboflavin supplements were discontinued. No genotype-phenotype correlations for riboflavin responsiveness could be identified. In another retrospective study, 15 individuals with SCAD deficiency ascertained over a period of seven years were challenged with fasting and fat-loading tests [van Maldegem et al 2010a]. Three genotypic subgroups were defined: biallelic for pathogenic variants, heterozygous for a pathogenic variant and a susceptibility variant, and biallelic for susceptibility variants. Free carnitine levels were normal in all individuals. When fasted, three individuals developed ketotic hypoglycemia associated with decreased insulin levels and increased levels of growth hormone and cortisol. Lactate, pyruvate, and plasma ammonia concentrations were normal and plasma amino acid concentrations were consistent with normal gluconeogenesis and normal proximal urea cycle function [van Maldegem et al 2010a]. Note: In contrast, in disorders of medium- and long-chain fatty acid oxidation, fasting has been associated with a Reye-like illness with elevated plasma ammonia concentrations and severe hypoketotic hypoglycemia, suggesting impairment of gluconeogenesis and the proximal urea cycle. Fat loading elicited a normal ketogenic response without a rise in urine EMA, confirming previous speculation that ketogenesis is likely normal in SCAD deficiency [Bennett 2010, van Maldegem et al 2010a]. In the two studies described above as well as previous case reports, hypoglycemia occurred in fewer than 20% of individuals with SCAD deficiency and normal ketogenesis was observed, ensuring cellular energy during some physiologic stressors.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Preventive measures if necessary include avoidance of fasting longer than 12 hours (during childhood) and an age-appropriate heart-healthy diet. Age-appropriate shorter fasting periods would be required in infants and toddlers. No dietary fat restriction or specific supplements are recommended in SCAD deficiency [Bennett 2010, van Maldegem et al 2010a].

Surveillance

Longitudinal follow up of persons with SCAD deficiency may be helpful in order to more clearly define the natural history over the life span, including annual visits to a metabolic clinic to assess growth and development as well as nutritional status (protein and iron stores, concentration of RBC or plasma essential fatty acids, and plasma carnitine concentration). For individuals with a history of metabolic acidosis, hypoglycemia, and/or other acutely presenting symptoms, the need for closer follow up and surveillance should be determined by the physician.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Fasting longer than 12 hours especially during a febrile or gastrointestinal illness may predispose an affected individual to dehydration, metabolic acidosis, and/or hypoglycemia. Shorter fasting periods (at least the normal age-appropriate recommendations) should be followed in infants and toddlers.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures. If the pathogenic and/or susceptibility variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. If the pathogenic and/or susceptibility variants in the family are not known, biochemical genetic testing, such as plasma acylcarnitines and urinary organic acids, can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Mothers of children diagnosed with fatty acid oxidation disorders, including SCAD deficiency, should inform their obstetrician so that routine monitoring for pregnancy complications can be observed.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.