

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a SCN8A-related encephalopathy with epilepsy, the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic examination including: EEG, which may provide an assessment of the overall degree of epileptic encephalopathy and seizure type Brain MRI if not previously performed Cognitive and behavioral neuropsychological evaluation ECG to assess for cardiac arrhythmias, which have been identified in some patients with mutation of genes encoding other sodium channel subunits and may increase the risk of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 No published treatment guidelines exist. Seizure control should be managed by a pediatric neurologist with expertise in epilepsy management who is familiar with the pharmacotherapy for SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy and how it differs from treatment of similar disorders (e.g., Dravet syndrome; see SCN1A-Related Seizure Disorders and Differential Diagnosis). Vigorous attempts to control seizures with drug polytherapy are warranted because children with SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy are at risk for sudden unexplained death in epilepsy (SUDEP) as well as prolonged acute seizures that may cause permanent injury [Chipaux et al 2010, Takayanagi et al 2010]. Sodium channel blockers. Several studies suggest that patients with SCN8A-related epilepsy with encephalopathy respond favorably to the class of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) that block sodium channels; these include phenytoin, valproate, carbamazepine, lacosamide, lamotrigine, rufinamide, and oxcarbazepine [Kong et al 2015b, Larsen et al 2015, Boerma et al 2016]. The effectiveness of sodium channel blockers is consistent with the activating effects of most SCN8A pathogenic variants [Wagnon & Meisler 2015, Wagnon et al 2015a, Wagnon et al 2015b]. Most patients are maintained on multiple medications with incomplete seizure control. One study of four patients reported a positive response to high doses of phenytoin [Boerma et al 2016]. 
            Other AEDs Clobazam, part of the standard of care for epilepsy in Europe, is now FDA-approved for the treatment of seizures in Lennox-Gastaut syndrome [Selmer et al 2009]. Phenobarbital, while effective for seizure control, is poorly tolerated because of its effects on cognition. Levetiracetam (Keppra®) has been reported by several families to be ineffective or occasionally associated with an increase in seizure frequency [M Hammer, unpublished data]. Other. When seizures are not responsive to conventional AEDs, the following drugs/treatment modalities may be effective based on anecdotal information: Corticosteroids Immunoglobulins Vagus nerve stimulator Ketogenic diet Cannabinoids Sleep hygiene. As described for Dravet syndrome, sleep deprivation and illness can exacerbate SCN8A-related seizures; thus, good sleep hygiene should be encouraged. Comorbidity with sleep apnea can also occur frequently in individuals with epilepsy [Malow et al 2000], and can influence seizure control, behavior, and cognition. Polysomnography should be considered if obstructive or central sleep apnea is suspected. Caregivers. For information on non-medical interventions and coping strategies for parents or caregivers of children diagnosed with epilepsy, see Epilepsy & My Child Toolkit.

Surveillance

 Evaluate periodically for neurologic, cognitive, and/or behavioral deterioration. Monitor with EEG and other modalities (e.g., video EEG telemetry or ambulatory EEG) when new or different seizure types are suspected. Because of the increased risk of SUDEP, some families use oxygen monitoring during sleep.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Several families of affected individuals report worsening of seizures with levetiracetam (Keppra®) [M Hammer, unpublished data].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.