http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/scs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS), the following evaluations are recommended: Determination of the degree of facial asymmetry to establish a baseline for future recognition of progressive facial asymmetry Ophthalmologic examination for evaluation of ptosis, strabismus, amblyopia, lacrimal duct stenosis, and increased ICP [Woods et al 2009] Screening for vertebral (particularly cervical) anomalies using routine radiographs (At age ~2 years, increased mineralization of the vertebrae allows for better interpretation of flexion/extension views of the cervical spine in evaluation for functional instability.) Audiologic screening for hearing loss Examination for cleft palate; if cleft palate is present, assessment of feeding ability and growth Examination of upper and lower extremities for anomalies; if anomalies are present, x-ray and/or orthopedic evaluation for radial ray or hallux anomalies Measurement of height and growth velocity; if short stature and/or reduced linear growth velocity is present, evaluation by an endocrinologist Screening developmental assessment on any child demonstrating developmental delays and all children found to have a 7p microdeletion, if developmental delay is identified, comprehensive developmental assessment

Treatment of Manifestations

 As with all children with functional craniofacial malformations, management through an established craniofacial team is recommended. While management protocols are likely to differ among craniofacial teams, it is generally accepted that individuals with SCS should undergo cranioplasty in the first year of life. Cranioplasty involves extensive surgery to release fused sutures including repositioning and reconstruction of the malformed calvaria. It prevents the following: Progressive facial asymmetry that can develop in individuals with unilateral or asymmetric coronal fusion Increased intracranial pressure (ICP) that can develop in individuals with multiple sutural synostosis (bicoronal or other sutures) Progressive hypertropia resulting from overaction of the ipsilateral inferior oblique muscle in cases of unilateral coronal synostosis [Weiss & Phillips 2006]. In some circumstances, midfacial surgery is necessary during childhood to address dental malocclusion, swallowing difficulties, or respiratory problems. If cleft palate is present, it is treated as in other disorders, including surgical closure, assurance of adequate feeding and weight gain, and speech therapy. In most cases, cranioplasty precedes palatal repair. Orthodontic treatment and/or orthognathic surgery may be required at or near the completion of facial growth. If developmental delay is identified, early intervention and/or special education are appropriate. Hearing loss, if present, should be treated in a standard manner (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). Ophthalmologic abnormalities are treated in a standard fashion. Ptosis and strabismus should be corrected during early childhood to prevent amblyopia, either with patching or surgery.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Early referral to a craniofacial center with expertise in the management of SCS can minimize the secondary effects of craniosynostosis and other functional deficits. Referral to early intervention services if there are concerns for developmental delay is appropriate to improve outcome. Tympanostomy tubes are appropriate for children with cleft palate or other causes of persistent middle ear effusion and/or otitis media. Cervical spine radiograph to evaluate for segmentation defects is appropriate before initiating activities that put the spine at risk (e.g., gymnastics, football, soccer).

Surveillance

 Because increased intracranial pressure (ICP) can develop even after successful treatment of craniosynostosis, brain imaging or ophthalmologic evaluation for chronic papilledema should be obtained periodically until age 15 years, or at any time symptoms (e.g., headache, reduced school performance) are identified. Examination for progression of facial asymmetry particularly in individuals with untreated unilateral coronal synostosis should continue until the completion of facial growth (age ~16 years). Audiologic screening throughout childhood is indicated. Regular ophthalmologic evaluations (frequency determined on the basis of symptoms) should begin before age two years or earlier if strabismus or severe ptosis is identified. If cleft palate is present, monitor for ear infections and hearing loss. Screen for sleep-disordered breathing at all visits. At least annual assessment of developmental status of preschool-aged children is appropriate. If findings suggest developmental delay, comprehensive developmental assessment and referral to early intervention is indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.