http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/short

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with SHORT syndrome the following evaluations are recommended if not performed at the time of diagnosis: For individuals of any age just diagnosed with SHORT syndrome: Examination by an ophthalmologist experienced in management of developmental eye disorders or glaucoma with particular attention to the anterior chamber and intraocular pressure Hearing assessment Medical genetics consultation For infants just diagnosed with SHORT syndrome: Measurement of length and weight Assessment of speech and language or motor skills in those with evidence of developmental delays For older children and adults just diagnosed with SHORT syndrome: Dental examination Assessment for evidence of insulin resistance/diabetes mellitus

Treatment of Manifestations

Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly or related anterior chamber ocular anomalies. Treatment by an ophthalmologist experienced in management of developmental eye disorders or glaucoma is indicated to reduce and stabilize ocular pressures and to preserve vision. Dental anomalies. Treatment of dental anomalies is standard and may include crowns and dental prostheses. Insulin resistance/diabetes mellitus. Standard treatment for glucose intolerance and diabetes mellitus with diet, lifestyle, oral medication, and insulin under the supervision of a specialist in diabetes care is recommended. Sensorineural hearing loss. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate: Regular monitoring of growth including height, weight, and body mass index Ongoing eye examinations in individuals with evidence of an anterior chamber anomaly by an individual with expertise in developmental eye disorders or glaucoma Screening for insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus beginning in mid-childhood Periodic hearing assessments in childhood

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Given the increased risk for insulin resistance in individuals taking growth hormone, it has been suggested that growth hormone be contraindicated in individuals with SHORT syndrome [Thauvin-Robinet et al 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

Successful pregnancies have occurred in women with SHORT syndrome. If present, diabetes mellitus is managed as appropriate. Fetal growth should be monitored recognizing that SHORT syndrome could be an explanation for IUGR in a pregnancy at 50% risk.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.