http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sickle

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of end-organ damage and needs in an individual diagnosed with sickle cell disease (SCD), the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Hematology consultation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Additional evaluations vary with the age and clinical status of the individual:

Infants
after 12 months should have baseline laboratory studies including the following:

CBC and reticulocyte count

Measurement of HbF (%)

Assessment of iron status

A thalassemia screen, which includes hemoglobin electrophoresis or HPLC and an inclusion body prep

Baseline vitamin D; renal and liver function tests

Extended red cell phenotyping so that antigen matched blood may be given if transfusion is urgently needed

During childhood HLA typing should be offered to the affected individual and all full biologically matched sibs.

Older individuals. See Surveillance.

Treatment of Manifestations



Lifelong comprehensive care is necessary to minimize morbidity, reduce early mortality, and maximize quality of life. See Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements.

Education of parents, caregivers, and affected individuals is the cornerstone of care:

Families must appreciate the importance of routine health maintenance visits, prophylactic medications, and early intervention for both acute and chronic complications.

Warning signs of acute illness such as fever, respiratory symptoms, pallor, lethargy, splenic enlargement, and neurologic changes must be reviewed regularly and must include education for the affected individual, as developmentally appropriate.

A systematic approach to pain management should be reviewed regularly. This includes identifying and reversing common triggers for sickle cell pain (and distinguishing it from other etiologies of pain), hydration, warmth, ambulation, distraction, and other comfort maneuvers. Initiation of NSAIDs and appropriate use of opiates should be reviewed.

All families should have a plan in place for 24-hour access to a medical facility that can provide urgent evaluation and treatment of acute illnesses such as fever, acute chest syndrome, splenic sequestration, and stroke.

Families should be provided baseline (steady state) laboratory values for purposes of comparison, as values often change during acute illness.

General management of specific problems [NHS 2010, Bender & Seibel 2012, Brousse et al 2014, Yawn et al 2014] includes the following:

Vaso-occlusive pain episodes (including dactylitis)

The initial focus should include the reversal of inciting triggers (e.g., cold, dehydration).

Pain episodes are optimally managed using a multi-model approach that may include warmth, hydration, massage, distraction, acupuncture, biofeedback, self-hypnosis, and pharmaceuticals.

Uncomplicated pain episodes may be managed at home with oral hydration and oral analgesics including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and opiates.

More severe pain episodes require hospitalization and administration of parenteral fluids and analgesics in addition to adjunctive treatments such as massage and physical therapy.

Optimal analgesia is generally achieved with morphine (or other opiate) given around the clock by a patient-controlled analgesia device (PCA) or by continuous infusion.

NSAIDs (e.g., ketorolac, ibuprofen, naproxen) may be used to augment the analgesic effect of opiates. NSAIDs can also decrease inflammation, which is part of the pathophysiology.

Adequate, but not excessive hydration with IV fluids should be provided to maintain euvolemia, and individuals should be monitored closely for the development of other complications such as acute chest syndrome (ACS), splenic sequestration, or opiate-induced constipation.

A thorough evaluation for infection, including blood culture, urine culture, and chest x-ray should be considered based on the clinical scenario.

Note: Transfusion and hydroxyurea are not useful treatments for acute pain episodes (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Fever/suspected infection. Individuals with temperature greater than 38.3° C or persistent temperature elevation above baseline require:

Rapid triage and physical assessment;

Urgent CBC and reticulocyte count;

Blood culture (and other cultures as clinically indicated) and a low threshold for chest x-ray when respiratory symptoms are present, as ACS can often present with a normal physical examination;

Parenteral broad-spectrum empiric antibiotics such as ceftriaxone pending culture results. A macrolide antibiotic should be added if pneumonia/ACS is a concern. Additional antibiotics should be added only for proven or suspected meningitis or other severe illness.

Note: With the changing natural history of fever and sepsis in individuals with SCD in the US there is increasing evidence that empiric treatment with parenteral antibiotics without obtaining cultures may be appropriate for well-appearing, fully immunized children with fever <39 C; however, this work has not yet been replicated nor has it become accepted practice [Baskin et al 2013, Ellison et al 2015].

Acute chest syndrome (ACS). The index of suspicion for ACS should be high when individuals with SCD have fever, chest pain, or respiratory signs or symptoms. Given the high mortality associated with ACS, an aggressive multimodal treatment strategy should be initiated [Miller 2011]:

Perform chest x-ray examination.

Provide aggressive treatment with oxygen, analgesics, and antibiotics (including a macrolide).

Incentive spirometry should be encouraged.

Hypoxemia can progress to need for intubation and mechanical ventilatory support.

Blood transfusion may be required for those who are critically ill, have multi-lobar disease, or have progressive disease despite conservative therapy.

Aplastic crisis. Monitoring of hematocrit (both absolute and compared with the individual's baseline), reticulocyte count, and cardiovascular status are required. Blood transfusion may be necessary. Aplastic crisis caused by parvovirus B19 will often spontaneously resolve; however, if the reticulocyte count does not improve, intravenous gamma-globulin can be considered to assist in viral clearance. Any sibs or other close contacts with SCD should be monitored for red blood cell aplasia because the parvovirus is easily transmissible.

Splenic sequestration. Severe episodes of splenic sequestration may progress rapidly to cardiovascular collapse and death; thus, emergency red blood cell transfusion is indicated when signs of cardiovascular instability are present. Parents should be taught how to monitor for splenic enlargement and recognize symptoms of sequestration and when to seek medical attention. Individuals who experience multiple severe episodes of splenic sequestration may require splenectomy.

Pulmonary hypertension. Diagnostic criteria, as well as when and how to intervene, are becoming increasingly controversial [Hassell et al 2014, Klings et al 2014a, Klings et al 2014b, Hebson et al 2015]. Existing consensus guidelines are not fully accepted by experts in the field. Thus, discussion with local sickle cell and pulmonary hypertension experts should be used to guide care. The following general approach is reasonable:

Aggressive evaluation and treatment of additional etiologies contributing to pulmonary hypertension (e.g., thrombotic disease, obstructive sleep apnea)

Optimization of SCD-related therapy to stop progression (e.g., chronic transfusions, hydroxyurea, oxygen therapy if hypoxemic)

Stroke. Any history of an acute neurologic symptom or event warrants emergent evaluation including a CBC with reticulocyte count and a non-contrast brain CT examination. Cerebral hemorrhage requires immediate neurosurgical consultation. An MRI/MRA to define injury should be obtained as soon as available, but definitive treatment with exchange transfusion should never be delayed for these results.

Treatment for children with acute ischemic stroke includes the following:

Monitor neurologic status and aggressively treat increased intracranial pressure and seizures, if present.

Exchange transfusion with the goal of decreasing HbS percentage to <30% of the total hemoglobin followed by a chronic transfusion program can significantly decrease repeat risk for stroke [Wang et al 2000]. Without continued therapy, as many as 60%-90% of individuals who have had a stroke have a second stroke within three years. Thus, in most individuals a preventive chronic transfusion protocol is initiated after a CNS event and continued indefinitely [Adams & Brambilla 2005] (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations).

Hydroxyurea has been studied as an alternative to transfusion therapy [Ware & Helms 2012]. While it does not provide the same protection as transfusion therapy, it may be an alternative for affected individuals who are unable to receive transfusion therapy (e.g., those living in limiting resource settings such as the Third World) or are difficult to transfuse due to alloimmunization [de Montalembert 2012].

Chronic transfusion has been shown to reduce silent infarcts; however, unlike for overt infracts, there is not a universally accepted consensus regarding the management of individuals with silent infarcts [DeBaun et al 2014, Estcourt et al 2017].

Priapism. Episodes of severe priapism require urgent evaluation and treatment, including hydration and analgesia, and may require aspiration and irrigation by an urologist.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Ongoing education is essential to help minimize morbidity and mortality. Education comprises a regular review of interventions including the following:

Maintaining hydration and avoiding extremes of climate

Monitoring for signs and symptoms requiring acute medical intervention

Early detection of chronic complications

Updates on new therapies

Disease-modulating therapies are discussed in several reviews [Vichinsky 2012, Kassim & DeBaun 2013, Ware et al 2017].

Chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy. The initial goal of chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy varies depending on indication but typically is to maintain the percentage of HbS <30% and suppress reticulocytosis. Chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy may be warranted for the following [Yawn et al 2014, Howard 2016, Ware et al 2017]:

Primary prevention of stroke in individuals with an abnormal transcranial Doppler

Prevention of stroke recurrence

Treatment of chronic pain refractory to other therapies

Pulmonary hypertension

Chronic renal failure

Recurrent episodes of ACS

Severe end-organ damage

Complications of chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy include: iron overload, alloimmunization, and, rarely, infection. To limit alloimmunization and transfusion reactions, extended matching of red blood cell antigens should be performed and blood products should be leuko-reduced (removal of white blood cells from the transfusion product). Red blood cells antigen matched at the full Rh locus (D, C, E) and Kell have been suggested to decrease alloimmunization rates, as well as other alleles when possible [Lasalle-Williams et al 2011]. Approaches to decrease alloimmunization in the future include obtaining a better understanding of the process of alloimmunization as well as molecular genotyping. Defining antigens molecularly has multiple benefits including the ability to type cells when serologic reagents are not available [Yazdanbakhsh et al 2012, Matteocci & Pierelli 2014].

Hydroxycarbamide (hydroxyurea), until recently the only FDA-approved therapy for SCD, is only approved for adults. Hydroxyurea benefits individuals with SCD via several mechanisms [Platt 2008, Ware 2010] including:

Induction of HbF synthesis resulting in decreased sickling and improved red-cell survival;

Reduction of white blood cell (WBC), reticulocyte and platelet counts;

Metabolism into nitric oxide, a potent vasodilator;

Overall improvement in blood flow;

Reduction of vascular inflammation.

Multiple NIH consensus statements have noted strong evidence to support its routine use in adults [Brawley et al 2008, Yawn et al 2014]. It has been demonstrated that hydroxyurea therapy is safe to use in children as young as nine months with no decrease in immune function [Ware 2010, Rogers et al 2011, Wang et al 2011, Strouse & Heeney 2012, Lederman et al 2014]. It is now very strongly recommended that every individual with S/S and S/β0-thalassemia age nine months or older be offered treatment with hydroxyurea [Yawn et al 2014]. This early initiation decreases clinical events [Thornburg et al 2012]. In addition, use of hydroxyurea has been associated with a decrease in healthcare costs [Wang et al 2013].

Hydroxyurea can have potentially significant toxicity, including myelosuppression. Individuals treated with hydroxyurea must be monitored closely with CBCs and reticulocyte counts. In order to balance the benefits with potential toxicities of hydroxyurea, many suggest a careful titration of the drug to find a dosing for each affected person that provides an appropriate reduction in WBC count without toxicity [Ware 2010, Strouse & Heeney 2012, Yawn et al 2014].

Glutamine has just received FDA approval for the prevention of acute complications in individuals age five years and older with SCD, whether on hydroxyurea or not. Due to its antioxidant properties and in vitro activity, glutamine has long been considered of potential benefit in the treatment of SCD. Though not published, a multicenter placebo-controlled clinical trial suggests that chronic use of oral glutamine can decrease the frequency of sickle cell pain-related episodes (clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01179217). Having a second FDA-approved drug opens the door to combination therapy using multiple agents.

Stem cell transplantation from a healthy donor or one with sickle cell trait can be curative in individuals with SCD and while the number of matched-sib transplants continues to rise, there is rapid evolution in the use of alternate donors. Children with SCD receiving stem cell transplantation using a matched sib donor can expect a 92% chance of cure with an overall survival of 95%. [King & Shenoy 2014, Nickel et al 2014, Walters 2015]. These phenomenal outcomes are balanced by potential long-term consequences including chronic-graft-versus host disease and infertility. There is debate now as to who should be transplanted and when. Transplanting with a matched sib early in life can subvert a life of debilitating complications and decreasing end-organ function – the latter making transplant at a later age more difficult. Notably, pediatric providers may overly worry about the risks of transplant, while not appreciating the high morbidity of sickle cell disease manifestations in adulthood. However, the comparative long-term benefits of supportive care (including hydroxyurea and improvements in sickle cell management) versus transplantation are not yet known.

Despite the great successes associated with transplantation, it is estimated that fewer than 30% of individuals with SCD have suitable matched-sib donors, few have suitable matched unrelated donors, and transplant for adults with SCD has been far more difficult due to regime-related toxicity. The field of transplantation for SCD is currently undergoing rapid expansion. Thus, the use of alternate donors (including unrelated donors and haploidentical donors) and cord blood is an active area of research [Alfraih et al 2016, Arnold et al 2016, Walters et al 2016].

Initial myeloablative regimes yielded too much toxicity for older individuals with SCD; the recent development of less toxic transplant regimens makes stem cell transplantation a more acceptable option for older individuals [Tisdale et al 2013].

While unrelated cord blood transplants are falling out of favor due to the high rate of graft failure, there is an increased use and success of haploidentical transplants, vastly broadening the number of individuals who could potentially be cured [Gluckman 2013, Tisdale et al 2013, Walters 2015, Alfraih et al 2016, Arnold et al 2016].

Gene therapy. As all allogenic transplants for SCD present a risk for graft-versus-host disease, there has been an explosion of research in gene therapy for SCD. While both gene editing and gene addition approaches are being activity pursued, only viral mediated gene therapy approaches are being used in clinical trials [Goodman & Malik 2016, Cavazzana et al 2017].

The criteria, risks, and benefits of transplantation are changing rapidly; thus, it is important for families and providers to discuss the risks and benefits with a transplantation center with expertise in SCD.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Newborn screening has made presymptomatic diagnosis possible, allowing for early, aggressive education on management issues, such as management of fevers. The use of prophylactic penicillin, immunization, and education emphasizing access to healthcare have significantly decreased morbidity and mortality in children, primarily by reducing deaths from sepsis.

Penicillin prophylaxis prevents 84% of life-threatening episodes of childhood Streptococcus pneumoniae sepsis [Gaston et al 1986]:

By age two months, all infants with SCD should receive penicillin V potassium prophylaxis, 125 mg orally, twice a day.

At age three years, the dose is increased to 250 mg orally, twice a day, and then continued until at least age five years.

Prophylaxis for those allergic to penicillin can include erythromycin or azithromycin but care should be taken to avoid medications that alter metabolism and increase the risk of prolonged QTc syndrome [Gerber et al 2009].

Immunizations. Timely administration of vaccines is essential. Clinicians should follow the recommended vaccine schedule for functionally asplenic individuals, which includes additional vaccines such as the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine, and an altered schedule for meningococcal vaccines. Persons with sickle cell are considered high priority for annual influenza vaccine [Yawn et al 2014].

Folic acid supplementation should be considered to support the increased RBC synthesis secondary to the high RBC turnover in sickle cell.

Iron overload. Individuals receiving prophylactic as well as chronic transfusions are at risk for iron overload and should be monitored closely, initially by tracking the amount of blood transfused and monitoring serum ferritin concentration. Those with high exposures or documented iron overload should have an assessment of organ iron accumulation. With its increasing availability and safety and the ability to assess iron in multiple organs while avoiding sampling bias, quantitative radiographic evaluation such as T2*-weighted MRI is increasingly replacing biopsy [Wood 2007]. The noninvasive nature of monitoring iron overload via MRI or SQUID has led to significant improvements in the outcome of individuals with iron overload [Coates 2014]. Both oral or subcutaneous iron chelation therapy are recommended for those with documented excessive tissue iron deposition, with patient acceptance and use of medications being the main limiting factor [Coates & Wood 2017].

Surveillance



Surveillance should be tailored to an individual's specific phenotype and clinical history; however, most individuals benefit from routine age-dependent screening to allow for early detection and treatment of end-organ damage [NHS 2010, Yawn et al 2014]. The following are general guidelines compiled from several sources. Recently NHLBI has released updated guidelines that readers are encouraged to review. See Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements.

Comprehensive medical and social evaluation. Affected individuals should be seen routinely for evaluation of risks, review of care plan, education, and assessment of growth and development. Social work assessment with emphasis on support, resources, and the impact of disease on lifestyle should be performed. Routine dental care is recommended.

Mental health and neurocognitive assessment. Periodic mental health screening for signs of depression, anxiety, and isolation should occur. Neurocognitive testing should be performed prior to school entry and repeated periodically to identify learning difficulties that may be related to silent cerebral infarcts as well as other factors.

Annual laboratory assessment should include the following:

CBC with differential and reticulocyte count

Assessment of iron status

Liver function tests (LFTs), BUN, serum creatinine, and urinalysis (UA)

LDH as a marker of hemolysis

Vitamin D level; may be indicated because of the high prevalence of deficiencies in this population

Baseline values should be given to parents for comparison during times of illness.

Extended red cell phenotyping should be done once to decrease risk of alloimmunization with transfusions.

Assessment of stroke risk. Historically more than 10% of young children with Hb S/S and Hb S/β°-thalassemia (as well as some others) had overt strokes. Yearly screening with transcranial Doppler (TCD) starting at age two years followed by initiation of chronic therapy for those with high-velocity blood flow has drastically decreased stroke incidence in SCD [Fullerton et al 2004]. Individuals with an abnormally high arterial blood flow velocity have a high rate of stroke, which can be prevented by chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy. Children with normal velocities require yearly reevaluation as a proportion of them convert to higher-risk velocities over time [Adams et al 2004]. Initial studies suggest that this approach is decreasing the incidence of overt stroke in individuals with SCD, but additional measure may be of benefit as well [Fullerton et al 2004, Jordan et al 2012, Webb & Kwiatkowski 2013].

End-organ evaluation. While there is a clear consensus for use of screening TCD starting at age two years through at least age 16 years, there is variability in recommendations for additional screening. The NHLBI [Yawn et al 2014] suggests screening for a proliferative retinopathy by an ophthalmologist starting age ten years, and additional screening based on clinical history that may include:

Chest x-ray examination

ECG

Pulmonary function tests (PFTs)

Abdominal ultrasound examination

Echocardiogram to determine the tricuspid regurgitant (TR) jet with consideration of right heart catheterization depending on symptoms

Six-minute walk test

Pulmonary function testing

Sleep study (to assess nighttime hypoxemia)

Iron overload by MRI

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Education for individuals with SCD involves learning how to control one's environment to minimize the chance of exacerbations. Environmental controls include avoiding the following:

Dehydration

Extremes of temperature (e.g., swimming in cold water, which can trigger a pain episode)

Physical exhaustion

Extremely high altitude without oxygen supplementation

Cocaine. While alcohol and illegal drugs are never endorsed, cocaine and its derivatives, with their vasoconstrictive and cardiac stimulation effects, are particularly dangerous drugs in the setting of SCD.

The analgesic meperidine, which should be avoided as first-line therapy because of potential CNS toxicity

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Early diagnosis of at-risk family members may allow intervention before symptoms are present.

If born in the United States, sibs affected with SCD are diagnosed by universal newborn screening soon after birth (at which time referral to a pediatric hematologist is appropriate). Many states also identify sickle cell trait on newborn screening.

If newborn screening data is not available for at-risk sibs, several diagnostic approaches can be considered.

If the HBB pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, the gold standard is a combination of HPLC or isoelectric focusing combined with a CBC and reticulocyte count. As microcytosis helps guide interpretation of results, a measure of iron status such as a ZPP (zinc protoporphyrin) test or serum iron and TIBC (total iron binding capacity) is of benefit.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Pregnancy complications in SCD can be minimized with close follow up and collaboration between hematology and obstetric teams [Naik & Lanzkron 2012]. Pregnancy in women with SCD involves increased risk for thrombosis, infectious complications, and acute painful episodes [Villers et al 2008, Naik & Lanzkron 2012, Alayed et al 2014, Costa et al 2015]. There is conflicting information as to whether the risks for preeclampsia, eclampsia, pre-term labor, and maternal death are increased [Villers et al 2008, Naik & Lanzkron 2012, Alayed et al 2014, Costa et al 2015]. The risk of pregnancy complications increases when access to prenatal care is limited, reinforcing the importance of close hematologic and obstetric follow up [Naik & Lanzkron 2012]. The benefits of a chronic transfusion program versus the use of “as-needed” transfusions has not been established [Okusanya and Oladapo 2016]. As hydroxyurea is recommended for (and increasingly used in) adults, the current recommendation is that it be discontinued during pregnancy. While reports of human infants exposed prenatally to hydroxyurea have not noted an increased risk of malformations, in experimental animal models hydroxyurea has been noted to lead to an increase in congenital anomalies. The role of chronic transfusions in lieu of hydroxyurea needs to be addressed.

More than 99% of births to women with SCD occurring after 28 weeks’ gestation are live births with normal Apgar scores [Smith et al 1996]. Several studies have reported increased rates of low birth weight and intrauterine growth retardation in babies born to women with SCD [Hassell 2005]. Attention to postnatal opiate withdrawal in the babies of mothers treated with high-dose opiates during pregnancy is warranted.

Infants with SCD are asymptomatic in the antenatal, perinatal, and immediate postnatal periods; they manifest disease symptoms when fetal hemoglobin production switches to adult hemoglobin.

Therapies Under Investigation



Currently only one drug – hydroxyurea – is FDA approved for SCD, and labeling does not include children. After decades of slow progress in the field, acknowledgment of the plethora of pathways modulating the severity of SCD has led to a diverse array of therapeutic agents that are being investigated [Archer et al 2015, Kato 2016].

Some examples emphasizing the diverse array of involved pathways and agents are listed below. The field is changing rapidly; refer to ClinicalTrials.gov for the status of current studies.

Prevention of HbS polymerization. Hemoglobin S polymerizes in the T (tense) conformation associated with de-oxygenation, but not the R (relaxed) conformation associated with oxygenation. Thus, small molecules that block the T-state or stabilize the R-state are being assessed in clinical trials [Oder et al 2016].

Decreasing adhesion to the endothelium. Adhesion of WBC to the endothelium of the microcirculation slows blood flow, increasing HbS polymerization and worsening SCD. Agents that decrease cell adherence without compromising immune function are being pursued. E- and P-selectin specific agents are being tested with one showing promising results in a Phase III trial [Zhang et al 2016, Ataga et al 2017].

Modifying inflammatory responses. Regadenoson is an adenosine A2A receptor agonist that modifies natural killer cell activity and has shown benefit in animal models. It has been evaluated in a Phase I study and a Phase II clinical trial is under way [Field et al 2013].

Antioxidants therapy. Multiple antioxidants are being studied. One, glutamine, is a key factor in determining red cell red-ox state and its level has been a marker of disease severity [Morris et al 2008b]. Results for a Phase III clinical trial of glutamine supplementation are pending.

Rejuvenation of nitric oxide (NO) stores. Arginine, the precursor of NO, has been studied in several contexts and a Phase II clinical trial has shown benefit in hospitalized people with sickle cell pain [Morris et al 2013]. As a result, arginine has been featured in multiple clinical trials.

Induction of fetal hemoglobin. Multiple pathways and factors associated with the high-level expression of the fetal hemoglobin genes (HBG1 and HBG2) have been identified and are currently targets for intervention [Perrine et al 2014, Lettre & Bauer 2016]. Representative pathways include LSD-1 inhibitors [Shi et al 2013, Cui et al 2015], thalidomide inhibitors (e.g., pomolidomide) [Dulmovits et al 2016], nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 inhibitors (e.g., tert-butylhydroquinone) [Macari & Lowrey 2011, Macari et al 2013], HDAC inhibitors [Okam & Ebert 2012], short-chain fatty acids (e.g., butyrate or valproic acid), and antimetabolites (e.g., 2’ deoxy 5’ azacytidine [decitabine]) [Saunthararajah et al 2008]. A promising approach to therapy is the development of inhibitors to the protein Bcl11a. Bcl11a was identified as an HbF cell quantitative trait locus in a genome-wide association study [Menzel et al 2007]. Since then it has been shown to bind within the β-globin locus and to be critical for suppressing fetal globin gene expression in adult erythroid cells [Sankaran et al 2008, Sankaran et al 2010]. Knockdown or knockout of Bcl11a in model systems, as well as naturally occurring deletions that remove its binding site in humans, result in substantial increases in HbF. These elevated levels of HbF provide therapeutic benefits to individuals with both SCD and thalassemia [Sankaran et al 2011, Wilber et al 2011, Xu et al 2011]. Multiple approaches are being taken to inhibit Bcl11a function in vivo, including gene editing to disrupt the erythroid-specific enhancer of Bcl11a [Lettre & Bauer 2016].

Phytomedicines, including some mixtures of plants, are under investigation. There are initial promising safety and efficacy data for Niprisan® and SCD-101 [Oniyangi & Cohall 2015].

Gene therapy. As SCD arises from a defined single-nucleotide substitution in the β-globin gene whose expression is restricted to erythroid cells derived from bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells, SCD is an ideal candidate for gene therapy. Gene therapy provides the benefit of stem cell transplantation, but without the problems associated with the use of an allogenic source of stem cells. Ideally, gene therapy would lead to an increase in non-sickle β-like chains, while lowering the number of sickle chains, for example by replacing the HbS pathogenic variant (p.Glu6Val) with a normal allele.

The most progress has been made using viral vector-mediated addition of a normal β-like gene, potentially modified to have additional anti-sickling properties. This leaves the endogenous sickle allele intact. While multiple groups are moving towards these gene addition clinical trials, to date only one individual is reported to have been cured [Cavazzana et al 2017, Ribeil et al 2017]. The status of these trials is changing rapidly; refer to ClinicalTrials.gov for the most up-to-date information.

Multiple gene therapy strategies that do not involve the addition of an additional, therapeutic globin gene are being pursued. A major obstacle to the above gene addition approaches is the requirement for long-term, high-level expression of the therapeutic gene, which requires the inclusion of large amounts of the major regulatory element, the locus control region. In contrast, these approaches involve the transduction and stable integration of therapeutic reagent for which low-level expression suffices. These include:

Using transactivators to stimulate the minimally expressed delta gene or the fetal or embryonic genes;

Inducing embryonic α-like chains that, when forming tetramers with sickle chains, are less likely to polymerize;

Decreasing Bcl11a expression whether by knocking out erythroid regulatory elements or binding sites, knocking down mRNA, or altering protein interactions; and

Inducing “looping” between the locus control region and the fetal globin genes resulting in activation of HbF.

Some of the above approaches have the additional benefit of reducing expression of the sickle gene while increasing expression of a therapeutic gene. However, they require long-term expression, typically from a viral vector integrated into the genome, leading to the very real risk of severe sequelae, such as leukemia, stemming from insertional mutagenesis [Cavazza et al 2013]. These detriments of routine gene therapy are avoided by “gene editing.” As multiple techniques to modify the human genome with base pair accuracy are becoming increasingly easy and efficient, gene editing approaches are being aggressively pursued [Scharenberg et al 2013, Kim & Kim 2014]. Gene editing typically entails the generation of a break in the DNA at or near the site of interest and the presence of a “corrective template.” Fortuitously, the cell’s endogenous DNA repair machinery inadvertently uses the therapeutic template when repairing the DNA, resulting in the incorporation of the corrective sequence. Gene editing is a “hit and run” approach, as it can be performed with the transient expression of the editing tools, thus avoiding the need for long-term expression as well as the risk for insertional mutagenesis, yet providing lifelong correction of the DNA. Two major approaches are being taken: removal of the sickle pathogenic variant and replacement with a normal sequence; and disruption of regulators of globin gene expression – such as Bcl11a, which in turn results in increased expression of the fetal genes. As this can be done in hematopoietic as well as induced pleuripotent stem cells, gene editing is the future of gene therapy.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.