

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with sideroblastic anemia and ataxia (XLSA/A), the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic examination Brain CT or MRI Psychological testing if indicated Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 There is no effective treatment for XLSA/A. Males with ataxia benefit from early physical therapy to facilitate acquisition of gross motor skills. Adaptive devices such as ankle fixation orthoses and walkers may be needed. Weighted eating utensils may help promote independent skills in childhood. Speech therapy may improve intelligibility problems resulting from dysarthria. Difficulty with handwriting may be managed with computers for word processing. The anemia is usually mild and asymptomatic and does not require treatment; hepatic and systemic iron overload does not occur.

Surveillance

 It is debated whether monitoring for possible iron overload is warranted in older individuals through routine screening of serum iron concentration, total iron binding capacity (TIBC), and serum ferritin concentration; iron overload is theoretically possible but has not been reported.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk 

 See Related Genetic Counseling Issues for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 One possible therapeutic approach to some of the disorders involving iron misdistribution is drug-mediated iron relocation. Deferiprone (DFP), an iron chelator used to treat iron overload, has iron-relocating abilities when used to treat disorders of regional iron accumulation. Because of their possible side effects, siderophores (small, high-affinity iron chelating compounds secreted by microorganisms) and other chelators must be administered with care; thus, the potential use of iron-redistributing agents in some iron-misdistribution diseases (such as XLSA/A) warrants rigorous investigation [Boddaert et al 2007, Camaschella 2008, Kakhlon et al 2010]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.