

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Schimke immunoosseous dysplasia (SIOD), the following evaluations are recommended: Measurement of growth and assessment of body proportions, with plotting on age-appropriate growth charts [Lücke et al 2006a] Evaluation of renal function by measurement of serum concentrations of creatinine and urea, protein excretion in urine, and creatinine clearance Referral to a nephrologist for evaluation Hematology evaluations to assess lymphopenia, anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia Immunology evaluations to evaluate the numbers of memory and naïve CD4 and CD8 T cells and B cells and immunoglobulin levels Assessment of developmental status with referral for formal evaluation if significant developmental delays or schooling delays are identified Dental evaluation after teeth are present Ophthalmologic evaluation Detailed history for headaches or neurologic abnormalities Orthopedic evaluation for symptoms of joint pain or evidence of scoliosis or kyphosis Assessment for osteopenia Thyroid function studies Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 
            Renal manifestations The renal disease progresses from proteinuria to ESRD at variable rates and is not prevented by any known drug therapies, although a few affected individuals treated with cyclosporin A, tacrolimus, or corticosteroids have had a transient reduction in the rate of renal disease progression. Renal transplantation effectively treats the nephropathy and neither nephropathy nor arteriosclerosis recurs in the graft [Lücke et al 2004, Elizondo et al 2006, Clewing et al 2007a]. Mild immunosuppressive therapy, such as immunosuppressive monotherapy, appears to improve outcome after renal transplantation [Lücke et al 2009]. 
            Orthopedic manifestations Some affected individuals who have survived beyond childhood have required hip replacement. Treatment of scoliosis and/or kyphosis is standard. 
            Immunologic manifestations Neutropenia usually responds well to supplementation with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. One affected individual has been successfully treated by bone marrow transplantation (BMT) [Petty et al 2000, Thomas et al 2004], and four affected individuals have died after BMT [Baradaran-Heravi et al 2013]. Individuals with autoimmune problems have had variable responses to treatment. A few individuals have been transfusion dependent because of anemia or thrombocytopenia. In one affected individual with thrombocytopenia, the autoimmune features resolved spontaneously; in one they resolved after steroid and IVIG treatments, and in one they cleared after splenectomy. All other affected individuals, excepting one with Evans syndrome, were successfully treated with immunosuppressive therapy such as steroids, cyclophosphamide, or IVIG. The individual with Evans syndrome was resistant to treatment with steroids, cyclosporin A, and rituximab [Zieg et al 2011]. Infectious disease manifestations. Individuals with recurrent infections, opportunistic infections, or declining lymphocytes or T-cell counts frequently require the care of an immunologist. Affected individuals with recurrent herpetic infections benefit from treatment with acyclovir. A few affected individuals have developed severe disseminated cutaneous papilloma virus infections that have improved with imiquimod and cidofovir. 
            Neurologic manifestations Individuals with transient ischemic attacks or strokes usually show temporary improvement on treatment with agents that improve blood flow or decrease coagulability (pentoxifylline, acetylsalicylic acid, dipyridamole, warfarin, heparin). To date, no curative or effective long-term therapies have been identified. Migraine headaches are often difficult to treat since response to anti-migraine medication is variable. Medications that have helped some individuals include ergotamine, sumatriptan, verapamil, and propranolol. Note: Use of ergotamine and sumatriptan is contraindicated in individuals with SIOD with severe vasoocclusive disease or cerebral ischemic events. Hypothyroidism can be treated with levothyroxine supplementation; however, supplementation does not have an ameliorative effect on the renal disease or T-cell deficiency.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Individuals with severe early-onset disease are best vaccinated according to the protocol for other T-cell immunodeficiencies (i.e., only inactivated vaccines should be used with avoidance of all live-attenuated vaccines). Because of the increased risk of opportunistic infection, prophylaxis (trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or atovquone) against Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia is usually recommended. If recurrent oral herpetic infections or shingles occur, prophylactic acyclovir may reduce the morbidity.

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Regular monitoring of the hips Annual monitoring of renal, immune, and hematologic status

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Hypertension. Poor blood pressure control can exacerbate or evoke cerebral ischemia. In particular, the hypertension arising from using high-dose steroids for empiric treatment of the nephrotic syndrome can evoke cerebral ischemia. Heat, stress, and lack of sleep. Individuals with transient neurologic attacks that are not of an ischemic origin have found that heat, stress, and lack of sleep can precipitate the attacks. Vaccinations with live vaccines. The T-cell deficiency is substantial and there have been serious infections in some individuals. Therefore, vaccination with all live vaccines should be avoided, including rotavirus, MMR, varicella, BCG, oral Salmonella typhi vaccine, and yellow fever virus vaccine. Anti-cancer therapies. SIOD cells and model organisms are hypersensitive to DNA damaging agents [Bansbach et al 2009, Ciccia et al 2009, Postow et al 2009, Yuan et al 2009, Yusufzai et al 2009, Bansbach et al 2010, Baradaran-Heravi et al 2012b].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate (see Diagnosis) older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from surveillance and preventive measures. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Combined renal and bone marrow transplantation may be discussed as an approach in individuals with declining renal and immune function prior to the onset of end-stage disease. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Individuals with SIOD usually have normal growth hormone studies. No affected individual treated with growth hormone supplementation has responded with improved growth. Anemia does not often respond to supplementation with erythropoietin or renal transplantation. However, it is possible that erythropoietin has a protective effect on the endothelia. Because of the T-cell defect, individuals with SIOD usually require milder immunosuppressive therapy for bone marrow transplantation than those undergoing transplantation for other diseases. Studies of mitochondrial function and nitrous oxide production have not detected any impairment; therefore, empiric treatments addressing such etiologies would be expected to have little effect [Lücke et al 2005b, Lücke et al 2006b].