http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/slc39a14-def

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with SLC39A14 deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic examination for dystonia, parkinsonism, and spasticity, including evaluation of ambulation and speech Assessment for physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and/or speech therapy Evaluation of swallowing and nutritional status Brain MRI, if not performed as part of the diagnostic evaluation Assessment of whole-blood manganese levels, if not performed as part of the diagnostic evaluation Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Symptomatic treatment. Early initiation of physiotherapy and orthopedic management aims to prevent contractures and maintain ambulation. As needed, individuals should be referred for adaptive aids (e.g., a walker or wheelchair for gait abnormalities) and assistive communication devices. Support by a speech and language/feeding specialist and nutritionist is indicated to assure adequate nutrition and to reduce the risk of aspiration. When an adequate oral diet can no longer be maintained, gastrostomy tube placement should be considered. Gastric feeding tube and/or tracheostomy may be required to prevent aspiration pneumonia. Note that symptomatic treatment with L-dopa and antispasticity medications including benzodiazepines, baclofen, and botulinum toxin has been attempted with limited success. There has been partial but poorly sustained response to trihexyphenidyl at high doses of 20 mg/day and intrathecal baclofen of 1,500-2,000 µg/day in two older sibs reported by Tuschl et al [2016]. Chelation therapy. Disodium calcium edetate, which primarily promotes the urinary excretion of manganese, was given intravenously (20 mg/kg/dose) twice daily for five days each month to a female age five years with SLC39A14 deficiency [Tuschl et al 2016]. After six months of treatment, neurologic manifestations improved and the child regained the ability to walk. In contrast, treatment of a female age 17 years with advanced disease (severe generalized dystonia with prominent oromandibular involvement, contractures, and scoliosis) did not affect disease progression as she continued to deteriorate with worsening tremor and stiffness. Hence, it is likely necessary to initiate chelation treatment early in the disease course. It is anticipated that chelation therapy will need to be lifelong. Potential adverse effects of disodium calcium edetate chelation therapy include thrombocytopenia and leukopenia, nephrotoxicity, hepatoxicity, hypocalcemia, and trace metal and vitamin deficiencies [Lamas et al 2012]. Monitoring includes the following: Complete blood count Assessment of renal function including urinalysis assessed at baseline and monthly thereafter. Monitoring may be extended to every other month once on a stable dose. Assessment of liver function Measurement of the concentrations of electrolytes, calcium, magnesium, and phosphate Measurement of the concentrations of trace metals (manganese, zinc, copper, and selenium) Assessment of iron status Treatment may need to be discontinued if: White blood count is <3.5x109/L Neutrophil count is <2.0x109/L Platelet count is <150x109/L >2+ proteinuria is detected on more than one occasion (with no evidence of infection) The above cut-off values are based on guidelines for D-penicillamine treatment [Chakravarty et al 2008]. Because chelation treatment with disodium calcium edetate may prevent early death and reduce morbidity in SLC39A14 deficiency, lower cut-off values may be acceptable. For each affected individual, the benefits of clinical treatment need to be carefully weighed against the risk of adverse effects.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Chelation therapy with disodium calcium edetate may prevent primary disease manifestations in affected sibs who are asymptomatic (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Surveillance

 Routine monitoring of: Height and weight using age and gender appropriate growth charts; Swallowing and diet to assure adequate nutrition; Ambulation and speech; Whole-blood manganese levels and brain MRI to assess treatment response and disease progression.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 The following should be avoided: Environmental manganese exposure (i.e., contaminated drinking water, occupational manganese exposure in welding/mining industries, contaminated ephedrone preparations) High manganese content of total parenteral nutrition Foods very high in manganese, including: cloves; saffron; nuts; mussels; dark chocolate; and pumpkin, sesame, and sunflower seeds

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Molecular genetic testing of apparently asymptomatic younger sibs of an affected individual for the familial SLC39A14 pathogenic variants allows early identification of sibs who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures (see Agents/Circumstances to Avoid). See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.