http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/slc6a3-dtds

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a SLC6A3-related dopamine transporter deficiency syndrome (DTDS), the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic assessment of the movement disorder Ophthalmology assessment of vision and eye movements Evaluation of caloric intake and feeding by a nutritionist Speech and language therapy assessment of communication and swallowing Physiotherapy evaluation of postural issues and tone Occupational therapy to provide suitable aids for communication, mobility, and home adaptations Hip and spine x-rays to evaluate for hip dislocation and spinal deformity Orthopedic review of any fixed contractures / joint dislocations Pediatric physician-led care for evaluation of general issues such as drooling, gastroesophageal reflux disease, constipation, disturbed sleeping, and pressure sores Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 A multidisciplinary approach to the long-term management of this progressive disorder is optimal [Ng et al 2014b, Kurian & Assmann 2015]. As first principle, risk factors that exacerbate the movement disorder should be avoided, including patient discomfort, poor body positioning, and pain (e.g., from constipation, urinary retention, pressure sores, undetected fractures). Early referral for nasogastric feeding or percutaneous gastrostomy is appropriate if oral feeding becomes problematic. Treatment for the palliative control of symptoms includes the following [Ng et al 2014b, Kurian & Assmann 2015]: Tetrabenazine and benzodiazepines may be useful in controlling chorea and dyskinesia in early stages of the disease. Chloral hydrate may also help during exacerbations or to aid sleep. Dystonia is more difficult to control and treatment often includes pramipexole and ropinirole as first-line agents (as few patients respond to levodopa/carbidopa and any response is usually modest and not sustained). Adjuncts, such as the anticholinergic trihexyphenidyl, are often needed. Baclofen, gabapentin, and clonidine may also be tried for severe dystonia. Benzodiazepines and chloral hydrate can be useful for exacerbations of dystonia or status dystonicus. Although the role of atypical tranquilizers (e.g., zopiclone) is not yet established, they have been used successfully in individual cases. Surgical interventions such as intrathecal baclofen and deep brain stimulation have been used on rare occasions late in the disease course when dystonia is severe; therapeutic benefit is limited [Kurian et al 2009]. Optimum management of tone with medical therapies and regular physiotherapy evaluation reduce risk of contracture development. Focal botulinum toxin may be considered for emerging limb contractures and to prevent hip dislocation. For the treatment of vomiting, anti-emetics such as the anti-serotoninergic agents (e.g., ondansetron) potentially have fewer side effects than other agents. Treatment of status dystonicus. Standard protocols are used in an intensive care setting. Anesthetic agents, GABA-ergic medication (including GABA-A receptor agonists such as benzodiazepines, GABA-enhancing medications such as gabapentin or phenobarbitone, and GABA-B receptor agonists like baclofen), further anticholinergics, and alpha adrenergic agents such as clonidine may be used. For severe life-threatening or medically intractable status dystonicus, intrathecal baclofen and pallidal deep brain stimulation may be considered.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Consider influenza vaccine, prophylactic antibiotics, and chest physiotherapy for patients prone to chest infections especially during winter months

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Evaluation every six to 12 months for early evidence of hip dislocation and/or spinal deformity Regular swallowing assessment to evaluate risk for aspiration Regular assessment by a dietitian/nutritionist to ensure adequate caloric intake

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Although dopamine agonists are used as first-line treatment of dystonia in SLC6A3-related DTDS, bromocriptine and pergolide are generally avoided due to increased risk of pulmonary, retroperitoneal, and pericardial fibrosis. Drugs with anti-dopaminergic side effects (e.g., some antihistamines, sedatives, and dimenhydrinate) may exacerbate the movement disorder.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.