http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/slo

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS), the following evaluations are recommended: Physical examination with special attention to growth parameters, congenital anomalies, and neurologic findings (hypotonia/hypertonia, seizures) Developmental assessment Ophthalmologic evaluation for strabismus, cataracts, and functional eye problems Cardiac evaluation (ECG and echocardiogram) for congenital defects Musculoskeletal evaluation for delineation of syndactyly, polydactyly, abnormalities of tone, and need for ankle-foot orthoses (AFOs) or other orthotics Genitourinary examination for anomalies of external genitalia in males and females Evaluation for functional problems of the gastrointestinal system by history and, if indicated, studies for pyloric stenosis and gastroesophageal reflux. Particular attention should also be given to stooling pattern, abdominal distention, or other signs of possible bowel obstruction, particularly in children with a more severe phenotype, because of their risk for Hirschsprung disease. Nutritional assessment for feeding problems and poor weight gain Possible MRI or other cranial imaging to evaluate for holoprosencephaly and/or other brain anomalies Renal ultrasound evaluation for renal anomalies Hearing evaluation for either sensorineural or conductive hearing loss Laboratory evaluation including glucose and electrolytes (for adrenal insufficiency), serum concentrations of amino transferases and bilirubin (for cholestatic liver disease), and testosterone in males Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Cholesterol Supplementation

Devising a treatment strategy for SLOS has been difficult as all factors contributing to the clinical phenotype are not yet known with certainty. It is likely that both low cholesterol levels and elevation of the cholesterol precursors 7-DHC and 8-DHC contribute to many of the clinical findings in affected individuals. Therefore, treatment strategies to date have focused on supplying exogenous cholesterol (either as egg yolks or as crystalline cholesterol in either an oil-based or aqueous suspension) in an attempt to raise cholesterol levels and secondarily decrease the levels of the precursors 7-DHC and 8-DHC. In general, affected individuals with a more severe biochemical defect require larger doses of cholesterol. It should be emphasized that dietary studies on cholesterol supplementation have not been conducted in a randomized fashion. There are multiple reports of dietary cholesterol treatment for SLOS [Elias et al 1997, Irons et al 1997, Linck et al 2000, Chan et al 2009]. Improved growth [Elias et al 1997, Irons et al 1997], reduced photosensitivity [Azurdia et al 2001, Starck et al 2002a], and increased nerve conduction velocity [Starck et al 2002a] have been objectively documented. However, dietary therapy does not appear to increase the levels of cholesterol in CSF to effect therapeutic effects [van Rooij et al 1997]. There is objective evidence that cholesterol supplementation may alleviate skin photosensitivity [Azurdia et al 2001]. Additional studies have shown improved tone and achievement of ambulation as well as developmental cognitive and behavioral changes [Irons et al 1997, Tierney et al 2000, Tierney et al 2001]. However, these studies did not have well-defined clinical outcome measures [Svoboda et al 2012]. Nonetheless, cholesterol supplementation should be considered in all individuals with SLOS because it may result in clinical improvement and has minimal side effects [Elias et al 1997, Nwokoro & Mulvihill 1997, Battaile & Steiner 2000].

Other Treatments

Referral to appropriate early intervention and physical/occupational/speech therapies is often required for identified disabilities. Many infants have difficulty with suck and/or swallow and may require gastrostomy for feeding and support of a nutritionist to help monitor caloric intake and growth. Infants with severe feeding problems generally require the insertion of gastrostomy tubes and/or the use of hypoallergenic, elemental formulas. Because children with SLOS have low muscle mass, careful monitoring of weight gain and growth is necessary so that overconsumption of calories does not lead to obesity. For those with frequent vomiting or apparent gastroesophageal reflux, a diagnosis of pyloric stenosis should be considered and treated as in the general population. Gastrointestinal reflux and/or constipation require treatment by a gastroenterologist. Neonatal cholestatic liver disease often resolves with cholesterol and/or bile acid therapy. Surgical repair may be required for cataracts, ptosis, and/or strabismus. Syndactyly of hands and/or feet and/or polydactyly may require surgical repair. Orthopedic management of the early hypotonia and later hypertonia includes the use of AFOs and other orthotics, as well as physical and occupational therapy. Tendon release surgery or Botox® therapy may be indicated in older children with significant hypertonia. Dental management can be challenging. Proper positioning, choice of dental devices, and sedation techniques need to be considered [Muzzin & Harper 2003]. Recurrent otitis media may require tympanostomy tube placement. Photosensitivity can be severe and many children cannot tolerate any exposure to sunlight; others can tolerate varying periods of exposure if properly clothed and protected with a UVA- and UVB-protection sunscreen.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

In severely affected individuals, treatment with stress steroids in doses customarily used for children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (see 21-Hydroxylase-Deficient Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia) is recommended during periods of illness, stress, or prolonged decrease in oral intake [Bianconi et al 2011]. Anesthetic problems including muscular rigidity and malignant hyperthermia have been reported [Choi & Nowaczyk 2000]. Airway management during anesthesia may be challenging; use of a laryngeal mask airway has been successful [Leal-Pavey 2004, Matveevskii et al 2006].

Surveillance

Routine health supervision by a physician familiar with SLOS, its complications, and its treatment includes the following: History, physical examination, and monitoring of growth parameters, with the frequency to be determined by the severity of the child's condition Age-appropriate developmental assessment at least twice a year until age three years and annually thereafter Nutritional assessment at least every three to four months until age two years and twice yearly thereafter Monitoring of cholesterol, serum concentration of 7-DHC, and serum amino transferases (ALT and AST) every three to four months in the first few years of life and twice yearly thereafter

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Treatment with haloperidol, which has a high affinity for the DHCR7 substrate binding site, may exacerbate the biochemical sterol abnormalities in individuals with SLOS and cause an increase in symptoms. It is likely that other drugs in this class will cause the same change in sterol levels [Kelley & Hennekam 2000]. Other psychotropic drugs shown to elevate 7DHC are trazodone and aripiprazole (Abilify®) [Hall et al 2013]. Thus, one must weigh the benefit of such medications against the potential negative side effects. As many individuals with SLOS do require psychotropic medications, close monitoring of clinical signs/symptoms and serum concentration of 7-DHC is recommended. Photosensitivity can be severe and extended periods of sun exposure should be avoided, as severe sunburn can occur with only limited exposure; however, limited sun exposure is possible for some affected individuals as long as protective clothing is worn and a sunscreen with UVA and UVB properties is used.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

All sibs should be tested by measurement of 7DHC concentration in plasma or amniotic fluid (prenatally). In cases of borderline 7DHC concentration, molecular genetic testing is indicated. Caution must be exercised in interpreting elevated 7DHC concentration in individuals treated with haloperidol, aripiprazole, and tradozone [Hall et al 2013]. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

No current guidelines exist for the management of pregnant women with SLOS, as to date only one affected woman with a successful pregnancy has been identified [Ellingson et al 2014].

Therapies Under Investigation

Jira et al [2000] used the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor simvastatin to treat two affected individuals for 14 and 23 months, resulting in normalization of cholesterol levels and a decrease of plasma precursors by 28% and 33%. Improvement in the precursor/cholesterol ratio in the cerebrospinal fluid was also found. Morphometric parameters improved in both individuals, and no adverse side effects were observed. However, these studies were not reproduced by subsequent investigations by Haas et al [2007] and Chan et al [2009]. Starck et al [2002b] treated two affected individuals with simvastatin, cholesterol supplementation, and bile acids and found reduction in absolute and relative serum concentration of 7-DHC. However, in one of these individuals, simvastatin was discontinued after hepatotoxic side effects and increased photosensitivity were observed. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

For more severely affected infants with SLOS, the issues of surgical management of congenital anomalies such as cleft palate, congenital heart disease, and genital anomalies need to be considered as they would be in any other infant with a severe, usually lethal disorder. Reassignment of sex of rearing for infants with a 46,XY karyotype and female genitalia may not always be appropriate because most will have early death, and the process of gender reassignment can be highly disruptive to a family already coping with the difficult issues of having a child with a genetic disorder characterized by life-threatening medical complications.