http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sma-xli

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with X-linked infantile spinal muscular atrophy (XL-SMA), the following evaluations are recommended: Nutrition/feeding Determine if caloric intake is adequate. Determine if dysphagia and/or fatigue during feeding are present [Iannaccone 2007]; consider swallowing evaluation, especially if aspiration is suspected [Wang et al 2007]. Determine if gastrostomy tube placement and fundoplication are indicated. Respiratory function Assess respiratory rate, work of breathing, presence of paradoxic breathing, chest wall shape, and skin perfusion. Perform baseline pulmonary studies to determine extent of restrictive airway disease and cough efficiency. Perform sleep evaluation to assess for sleep-disordered breathing including nocturnal hypoventilation and oxygen desaturation [Wang et al 2007]. Orthopedic evaluation to assess contractures Neurologic evaluation to assess muscle tone and help guide supportive management [Iannaccone 2007] Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Management is similar to that for classic SMA type 0 and SMA type I, caused by mutation of SMN. See Spinal Muscular Atrophy. 
Feeding/growth If oral intake is not adequate, consider higher-calorie feeds and fat supplementation. If weight gain is inadequate or the child cannot feed appropriately, consider nasogastric and possibly gastrostomy-tube placement. Watch for swallowing dysfunction and consider a formal swallowing evaluation, especially if coughing or choking and/or recurrent pneumonias are evident as they may be signs of aspiration. Manage gastroesophageal reflux disorder in the standard manner. Manage constipation (resulting from weak abdominal musculature and poor motility) with diet (fiber and water content). 
Respiratory Provide rigorous pulmonary toilet, supplemental oxygen, and noninvasive ventilatory support. Assist cough through mechanical devices or other means if the patient has ineffective cough. Secretion mobilization may be achieved through chest physiotherapy and postural drainage. Use oral suctioning as needed. Use oximetry to monitor the patient’s oxygen exchange status [Wang et al 2007]. In some cases artificial ventilation and tracheostomy may be employed. As in classic SMA, discuss "do not attempt to resuscitate" status with the family before respiratory failure occurs. This discussion may begin earlier, but is appropriate when abdominal breathing is present and/or the forced vital capacity is less than 30%. See Spinal Muscular Atrophy for further discussion of respiratory support in SMA. Sleep. Perform a sleep study if sleep-disordered breathing is suspected. Manage accordingly. Orthopedic. Orthopedic management and physical and occupational therapy are indicated to manage contractures and prevent development of further contractures related to muscle weakness.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Standard precautions against infection are appropriate.

Surveillance

The guidelines described below closely follow those presented in the consensus statement for standard care in spinal muscular atrophy [Wang et al 2007]. Individuals with XL-SMA should be followed regularly by a physician familiar with this condition (e.g., a clinical geneticist). Other subspecialists involved in ongoing care include the neurologist, pulmonologist, orthopedist, physical and occupational therapists, nutritionist, and gastroenterologist as needed. Affected children should be followed at least monthly until the severity and disease course are more clearly delineated. Affected children frequently die in infancy or early childhood; their clinical status should be followed closely to optimize management, and so that the family has a good understanding of the progression and can make informed decisions. The following are indicated on a routine basis: Neurologic evaluations to assess muscle tone and help guide supportive management Evaluation by a pulmonologist for evidence of progression of restrictive airway disease Monitoring of caloric intake and weight, linear growth, head circumference, and growth velocity Monitoring for scoliosis and kyphosis

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.