

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), the following evaluations are recommended. 
            Nutrition/feeding assessment
           Time required to complete a feeding Evidence of fatigue during a feeding/meal Weight plotted on standard growth curves 
            Respiratory function assessment
           Normal breathing pattern versus abdominal breathing pattern Forced vital capacity (FVC); in children older than age four years, the hand-held spirometer is accurate. When FVC is above 40%, decompensation during respiratory infection is less likely than when FVC is less than 40%. Sleep assessment. Consider a sleep study if the child snores during sleep or awakes fatigued in the morning. Activities of daily living. Assess equipment needed for independence, such as a power-chair and other equipment in the home to improve the quality of life for the affected individual and the caregiver. Orthopedic evaluation. Evaluate for development of contractures, scoliosis, and hip dislocation. Other. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

 The management of children with SMA starts with the diagnosis and classification into one of the five categories. A consensus document on the diagnosis and treatment of children with SMA has been developed [Wang et al 2007] (full text).

Health Issues Specific to SMA

 Nutrition. Bulbar dysfunction is universal in SMA I and gastrostomy should be considered early in the course of the disease. The bulbar dysfunction eventually becomes a serious problem for persons with SMA II and only very late in the course of disease for those with SMA III. Gastrointestinal dysmotility results in constipation, delayed gastric emptying, and potentially life-threatening gastroesophageal reflux. Pulmonary. Children with SMA I and II, and more rarely type III, have progressive decline in pulmonary function. Formal consultation with a pulmonologist familiar with SMA is indicated. Guidelines for assessment and intervention are published as part of the Consensus Statement for Standard of Care in Spinal Muscular Atrophy [Wang et al 2007]. Options for management (depending on family preference) include no respiratory support, noninvasive ventilation, and tracheotomy with mechanical ventilation. These options should be discussed with the parents/care providers before respiratory failure occurs. The type of respiratory support is dependent on the individual’s respiratory status, quality-of-life goals, and reduction in respiratory complications. Palliative care, with or without noninvasive ventilator support, is an option for the most severely affected individuals. Indications for noninvasive ventilation in SMA include hypoventilation, as demonstrated by decreased oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry or obstructive sleep apnea. Noninvasive ventilation has been shown to improve sleep breathing parameters in SMA I and II [Petrone et al 2007]. Noninvasive ventilation with BiPAP is commonly used in SMA as it may improve chest wall and lung development and is proposed to reduce lung infections and pulmonary comorbidity in SMA. Tracheotomy for chronic ventilation is an option that can be discussed with individuals and their families; however, it is controversial, especially in SMA I. Airway clearance can be addressed with a mechanical in-exsufflator in conjunction with suctioning and chest physiotherapy, especially in the setting of acute illness. Use of mechanical in-exsufflation in the treatment of children with neuromuscular diseases, including children with SMA, appears to reduce pulmonary complications [Chatwin et al 2003, Miske et al 2004]. Scoliosis occurs frequently in individuals with SMA II. Surgical repair should be considered based on progression of the curvature, pulmonary function, and bone maturity. Use of spinal orthosis prior to surgical intervention is common; however, there is insufficient evidence that spinal orthotics alter scoliosis. Use of the vertical expandable prosthetic titanium rib (VEPTR) is a possible treatment for severe scoliosis. Chandran and colleagues described the use of VEPTR in 11 children with SMA types I and II who were followed for an average of 43 months after the initial surgery [Chandran et al 2011]. The average age at time of surgery was six years. No surgical complications were identified. Medical complications were seen in two affected individuals: postoperative pneumonia and anemia. A newer technology involving magnetically controlled growing rods (MAGEC rods) allows for gradual outpatient distractions controlled by an external remote device. Early case reports for this device are becoming available, although experience is not specific to SMA [La Rosa et al 2017]. Hip dislocation is another orthopedic concern in SMA. A retrospective review of a large series of affected individuals suggests that asymptomatic hip dislocation does not require surgery [Sporer & Smith 2003].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Comprehensive care for individuals with SMA should be provided according to the published Consensus Statement for Standard of Care in Spinal Muscular Atrophy [Wang et al 2007]. See Treatment of Manifestations.

Surveillance

 Individuals with SMA are evaluated at least every six months; weaker children are evaluated more frequently. At each visit nutritional state, respiratory function, and orthopedic status (spine, hips, and joint range of motion) are assessed.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 No therapy for SMA is currently available, however a number of compounds have been studied and newer approaches (including some directed at increasing full-length SMN protein from SMN2 and gene replacement therapy) are being actively investigated.

Small-Molecule Therapy Approaches

 Increasing SMN protein production. Candidate molecules have been identified through cell-based high-throughput screening assays and include histone deacetylase inhibitors, aminoglycosides, and quinazolone derivatives. Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) are small molecules that have been shown to increase SMN expression and protein levels in the cytoplasm and nuclei of cells from the SMA mouse model as well as in human fibroblasts and lymphocytes [Chang et al 2001, Brichta et al 2003, Sumner et al 2003, Andreassi et al 2004, Brahe et al 2005]. However, clinical trials of HDACIs (including phenylbutyrate and valproic acid) have shown no difference in functional outcome measures compared with placebo [Mercuri et al 2007, Swoboda 2010]. Another molecule, hydroxyurea, a non-HDACI, was also found to increase SMN levels in SMA cell lines, but this compound failed to show improvement in a clinical trial [Chen et al 2010]. Salbutamol, a β-adrenergic agonist, also increases SMN protein in SMA fibroblasts [Angelozzi et al 2008]. Clinical experience to date is limited to two open-label studies of salbutamol/albuterol which have reported improved motor outcomes [Kinali et al 2002, Pane et al 2008]; no randomized, placebo-controlled trials have been performed to date. Quinazolone derivatives are another class of molecules identified through cell-based high-throughput screening programs. These compounds increased SMN2 promoter activity, altered SMN mRNA levels or mRNA splicing patterns, and increased SMN protein levels and nuclear gem numbers in cells derived from affected individuals [Jarecki et al 2005]. Further, delivery of these compounds to SMA mice significantly increased the mean life span (i.e., by ~21%-30%) [Butchbach et al 2010].

Neuroprotective and Other Approaches

 Other small molecules that have been tested but did not show proven benefit in SMA include: gabapentin [Miller et al 2001], creatine [Wang et al 2007], and riluzole [Russman et al 2003]. Olesoxime (TRO19622), a novel neuroprotective molecule, is currently under investigation in SMA (NCT02628743). Finally, a novel troponin activator (CK-2127107) is currently in a Phase II trial for SMA (NCT02644668).

RNA-Based Therapy Approaches

 Therapeutic approaches in this category aim to alter SMN2 splicing to increase the proportion of transcripts containing exon 7 and thus increase full-length SMN protein. Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) are single-stranded RNA molecules specifically designed to target complementary sequences in the SMN2 transcript leading to inclusion of exon 7. An antisense oligonucleotide (ASO), ASO-10-27, corrected SMN2 splicing and restored SMN expression in mice motor neurons after intracerebroventricular injection [Hua et al 2011]. Systemic administration of ASO-10-27 robustly rescued severe SMA mice much more effectively than intracerebroventricular administration; subcutaneous injections extended the median life span 25-fold. Encouraging pre-clinical data in SMA mouse models has subsequently led to a number of current clinical trials. Phase I and II open-label studies in SMA types I-III have shown that this drug could be delivered directly to the cerebral spinal fluid via lumbar puncture in this population with acceptable tolerability (NCT01494701, NCT01703988, NCT01839656). Thus, Ionis Pharmaceuticals has since completed enrollment for two Phase III trials of the ASO ISIS-SMNRx for the treatment of infants with SMA I (NCT02193074) and children with SMA II (NCT02292537). Results of these trials are not yet available. Finally, a trial in presymptomatic infants with genetically diagnosed SMA with this compound is also underway (NCT02386553). At least two other SNM2 splicing modifiers are currently in clinical trials in SMA, including Novartis Pharmaceuticals LMI070 (NCT02268552) and Roche RG7916 (NCT02633709). Results of these trials are not yet available.

Gene Therapy

 Gene replacement therapy with viral delivery of SMN1 is also under investigation in SMA. Foust and colleagues demonstrated that IV delivery of adeno-associated virus 9 (AAV9) carrying SMN1 on postnatal day 1 to SMA mice led to a normal life span (>400 days) compared with 16 days in the untreated mice [Foust et al 2010]. Based on these results, a Phase I trial of AAV9 containing SMN1 (AVXS-101), delivered intravenously to infants with type I SMA, was undertaken (NCT02122952). Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.