http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/snyder-robinson

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Snyder-Robinson syndrome (SRS), the following evaluations are recommended: Intellectual disability (ID) assessment using standardized neuropsychological tests to determine overall level of cognitive function as well as relative levels of performance and verbal skills. These assessments help guide recommendations for educational resources and special therapies. Neuropsychological assessment (visual, speech, or motor function) Bone density assessment by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scan to determine the degree of osteoporosis and the need for and response to calcium supplements Assessment of seizures, including EEG if seizures are suspected. The type of seizures may determine the selection of anticonvulsant. Clinical genetics consultation MRI of the brain to assess abnormal calcification (which has been noted in a few individuals and occurs in the absence of calcium supplementation)

Treatment of Manifestations

Speech, physical, and/or occupational therapy may be helpful. Some individuals have performed appropriately in special education programs, learned to follow commands, and held simple jobs [Arena et al 1996]. In contrast, others showed no improvement of psychomotor skills with special education [Becerra-Solano et al 2009]. Calcium supplementation has slightly improved bone mineral density in a few patients [Becerra-Solano et al 2009]. The mechanism of decreased bone mineral density is not well understood. Calcium supplementation should be started once decreased bone mineral density is noted. Seizures have shown varying responses to anti-seizure medications [Arena et al 1996, de Alencastro et al 2008]. Carbamazepine, phenobarbital, and clobazan have been used successfully to control seizures in some individuals.

Surveillance

Because of the osteoporosis, individuals with SRS are at increased risk for fractures and should be investigated for factures if medically indicated. While receiving calcium supplementation, patients should be monitored regularly for ectopic calcification with endocrine tests (including calcium, phosphorus, vitamin D, and hormone levels) and radiographs.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.