http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sotos

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Sotos syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended [Tatton-Brown & Rahman 2007]: A thorough history to identify known features of Sotos syndrome: learning difficulties, cardiac and renal anomalies, seizures, and scoliosis Physical examination including cardiac auscultation, blood pressure measurement, and back examination for scoliosis Investigations to detect abnormalities before they result in significant morbidity/mortality: In children in whom the diagnosis has just been established, echocardiogram and renal ultrasound examination In adults in whom the diagnosis has just been established, renal ultrasound examination to evaluate for renal damage from quiescent chronic vesicoureteral reflux Referral for audiologic assessment. Conductive hearing loss may occur at an increased frequency in Sotos syndrome; thus, the threshold for referral should be low. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 When clinical problems (e.g., cardiac anomalies, renal anomalies, scoliosis, seizures) or difficulties with learning/behavior/speech are identified, referral to the appropriate specialist is recommended. If MRI has been performed and ventricular dilatation demonstrated, shunting should not usually be necessary as the "arrested hydrocephalus" associated with Sotos syndrome is typically non-obstructive and not associated with raised intracranial pressure. If raised intracranial pressure is suspected, investigation and management in consultation with neurologists and neurosurgeons would be appropriate. Some children in North America have been prescribed methylphenidate with varying success; in Europe, behavioral management strategies are more commonly used, again with varying success.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated in individuals with vesicoureteral reflux.

Surveillance

 Regular evaluation by a general pediatrician is recommended for younger children, individuals with many medical complications needing coordination of medical specialists, and families requiring more support than average [Tatton-Brown & Rahman 2007]. The clinician may wish to evaluate older children/teenagers and those individuals without many medical complications less frequently. The following are appropriate at the clinical evaluation: Thorough history to identify known clinical sequelae of Sotos syndrome Cardiac auscultation Blood pressure measurement Examination for curvature of the spine Urine dipstick to assess for quiescent urine infection Referral to an ophthalmologist if strabismus or other problem with vision is suspected Referral for audiologic assessment if hearing is a concern or if the child has had many upper respiratory tract infections Referral to the appropriate clinical specialist if problems are identified Note: Cancer screening is not recommended. (1) The absolute risk of sacrococcygeal teratoma and neuroblastoma is low (~1%) [Tatton-Brown et al 2005b, Tatton-Brown & Rahman 2007]. This level of risk does not warrant routine screening, particularly as screening for neuroblastoma has not been shown to decrease mortality and can lead to false positive results [Schilling et al 2002]. (2) Wilms tumor risk is not significantly increased and routine renal ultrasound examination is not indicated [Scott et al 2006].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Preeclampsia occurs at a slightly higher frequency in women carrying a fetus with Sotos syndrome, careful monitoring in at-risk pregnancies is recommended.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.