http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/spg11

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spastic paraplegia 11 (SPG11), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neuropsychological testing to assess the cognitive impairment and decline

Neuro-urologic examination for those with sphincter disturbance

Electrophysiologic investigations (e.g., ENMG, VEP, SEP)

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



No specific drug treatment or cures exist for SPG11.

Care by a multidisciplinary team that may include a general practitioner, neurologist, medical geneticist, physiotherapist, physical therapist, social worker, and psychologist should be considered.

Symptomatic treatment to reduce pyramidal hyperactivity in the lower limbs includes the following:

Physiotherapy for stretching of the spastic muscles to prevent contractures

Anti-spastic drugs such as baclofen and tizanidine

Botulin toxin and intrathecal baclofen, which can be considered when oral drugs are ineffective and spasticity is severe and disabling

When sphincter disturbances become a problem, urodynamic evaluation should be performed in order to adapt treatment and monitor follow up. Anticholinergic drugs are indicated for urinary urgency.

Psychiatric manifestations should be treated in accordance with standard practice.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Follow up of sphincter disturbances is important to prevent bladder dysfunction and infection.

Early regular physiotherapy helps to prevent contractures.

Surveillance



Specialized outpatient clinic evaluations are suggested every six months to adjust medication and physical rehabilitation.

Brain MRI can be used to follow the atrophy of the corpus callosum, cerebellum, and brain stem, and to monitor increases in the size and intensity of white matter hyperintensities.

Regular electrophysiologic investigations (e.g., ENMG, VEP, SEP) are recommended to follow the extent of the disease.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.