http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/spg20

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with Troyer syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Height Occipitofrontal circumference (OFC) Speech and language development with attention to possible dysarthria and tongue dyspraxia Gross motor and fine motor skills Neurologic examination with attention to evidence of pyramidal and/or extrapyramidal movement disorders, distal amyotrophy, hyperreflexia School performance Emotional status, including presence or absence of emotional lability Skeletal abnormalities and skeletal x-rays as needed Brain MRI EMG

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment for spasticity is presently limited to reducing muscle spasticity through exercise and medication, especially Lioresal®, which is given either orally or via intrathecal pump. Dosages need to be individualized as some patients have mainly weakness with less spasticity (and thus do not benefit from large doses), while others have significant spasticity and require high doses. Tizanidine, dantrolene (see, however, Agents/Circumstances to Avoid), and Botox® have also been useful in reducing muscle spasticity. It is recommended that affected individuals participate in daily physical therapy designed to: Maintain and improve muscle flexibility and range of motion (stretching exercises); Improve muscle strength (through resistance exercise); Maintain walking reflexes (walking on a slowly moving treadmill with arm supports or walking in a swimming pool); and Improve cardiovascular fitness. These recommendations are based on the experience of approximately 200 persons with hereditary spastic paraplegia, who nearly unanimously reported benefit from daily physical exercise [Fink 2003]. Occupational therapy, assistive walking devices, and ankle-foot orthotics as needed are appropriate. Oxybutynin is helpful in reducing urinary urgency. Antidepressants or mood stabilizers can be prescribed to manage emotional lability. See also Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Overview.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Provide good nursing care and physiotherapy during disease progression; monitor for dysphagia to reduce risk of aspiration.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate: Specialized outpatient evaluations every six months to update medications and physical rehabilitation Cognitive testing Repeat skeletal survey

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Dantrolene should be avoided in persons who are ambulatory as it may induce irreversible weakness, which can adversely interfere with overall mobility.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.