http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/spg4

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with spastic paraplegia 4 (SPG4), the following evaluations are recommended: Neuro-urologic examination is advised for individuals who have sphincter disturbances. Whether neuropsychological testing should be performed to assess the cognitive impairment frequently reported in individuals with SPG4 remains unclear. So far, no consensus exists on the type of tests that should be performed, the timing of the tests, and the purpose. Considering that cognitive impairment is often absent or is detectable only by neuropsychological testing, one should be wary of increasing the burden of individuals with SPG4, and probably only recommend further testing when required by the affected individual. Electrophysiologic investigations may be advisable in case of pain and/or edema in the lower limbs to evaluate for associated neuropathy. Neuropathy (not a feature of SPG4 per se) may occur in individuals with SPG4 for other reasons and should be investigated and adequately treated. Because of the underlying HSP the neuropathy may remain undiagnosed if routine investigations are not conducted. Spinal MRI examination to exclude any additional degenerative disorder can be considered if unusual symptoms or pain are present. A thorough examination for associated restless legs syndrome (RLS) also appears to be warranted [Sperfeld et al 2007]. Clinical genetics consultation is appropriate.

Treatment of Manifestations

Care by a multidisciplinary team that includes a general practitioner, neurologist, clinical geneticist, physiotherapist, physical therapist, social worker, and psychologist should be considered. Symptomatic treatment includes use of the following: Antispastic drugs for leg spasticity Anticholinergic antispasmodic drugs for urinary urgency Regular physiotherapy for stretching of spastic muscles. Stretching should be done manually at all levels (hips, knees, ankles) and preceded by heat conditioning. Botulinum toxin and intrathecal baclofen can be proposed when oral drugs are ineffective and spasticity is severe and disabling. One open-label study with botulinum toxin injections showed an increase in gait velocity in persons with HSP after six months [Rousseaux et al 2007]. Urodynamic evaluation should be performed early in all affected individuals complaining of urgency or other problems, such as voiding difficulties, urine retention, and/or frequent urinary infections. Such symptoms should be monitored and treated according to individual needs and disease evolution. At the present time there is no consensus on treatment of sphincter disturbances (both urinary and anal) and management remains therefore symptomatic [Braschinsky et al 2010].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Follow-up of the sphincter disturbances is important to prevent bladder dysfunction. Early regular physiotherapy can prevent contractures to a certain extent. Intensive and early physiotherapy delays the development of symptoms related to spasticity and prolongs the ability to walk [Author, personal observation]. In children orthopedic treatment and botulinum toxin injections may also contribute to better ambulatory function. More systematic studies are, however, needed to confirm these observations.

Surveillance

Specialized outpatient evaluations are suggested every six months to update medications and physical rehabilitation.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

A double-blind crossover trial with gabapentin did not show improvement of spasticity in persons with SPG4 [Scheuer et al 2007].