http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/spg8

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with spastic paraplegia 8 (SPG8), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Urodynamic evaluation

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



No cures or specific drug treatments exist for hereditary spastic paraplegia. An approach to management of spasticity is reviewed by Young [1994]:

Daily regimen of physical therapy directed toward improving cardiovascular fitness, maintaining and improving muscle strength and gait, and reducing spasticity is recommended.

Physical therapy, assistive walking devices, and ankle-foot orthotics are often used.

Antispasmodic drugs (e.g., baclofen, BOTOX®, dantrolene, tizanidine), used one at a time, are usually helpful, especially early in the disease course. Baclofen can be tried first, and can be used with an intrathecal pump in some cases. The entire therapeutic range of doses in all four drugs is used. The drugs are administered before sleep if nocturnal cramps are problematic, otherwise three to four times per day. These drugs alleviate symptoms by decreasing cramps and making leg muscles less tight, which can facilitate walking. It usually takes a few days for their effects to become evident. No significant toxicity limits their use.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Bladder function should be routinely monitored to avoid urinary tract infections.

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

Regular neurologic examinations (1-2 per year) to evaluate disease progression and avoid complications of spasticity, including joint contractures

Referral to a urologist for urodynamic testing and follow-up when symptoms appear

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.