http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/spr-def

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with sepiapterin reductase deficiency (SRD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic consultation

Physical therapy, occupational therapy, and speech therapy evaluations depending on severity of manifestations

Neuropsychological evaluation depending on the severity of manifestations

Social services consultation depending on the severity of manifestations

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Therapy is aimed at correcting central nervous system (CNS) neurotransmitter deficits.

Recommended treatments are based on the few reported cases in the literature and extrapolation from strategies employed in treatment of other neurotransmitter disorders.

While the medications discussed below reduce manifestations of SRD, response can range from complete resolution to partial improvement. These medications most consistently correct motor abnormalities while in some cognitive manifestations remain more refractory.

Often, medications must be prescribed “off-label” without established pediatric dose ranges [Friedman et al 2012]:

L-dopa (0.1-16 mg/kg/day) in combination with 10%-25% carbidopa (or another peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor) is the main therapy to correct CNS dopamine deficiency. Optimal therapeutic level is determined by clinical response. Note: (1) Dose-related dyskinesias may occur [Abeling et al 2006, Neville 2007, Arrabal et al 2011, Friedman et al 2012]; they can be eliminated in most instances with reduced dosage or addition of a dopamine agonist to reduce fluctuations in dopaminergic stimulation [Lohmann et al 2012]. (2) Gastrointestinal side effects such as nausea may be reduced by increasing the proportion of administered carbidopa. (3) Although not reported, it is theoretically possible that individuals with SRD receiving high-dose L-dopa could develop cerebral folate deficiency and require supplementation with folinic acid (as has been observed in L-aromatic amino acid decarboxylase deficiency [Brun et al 2010]).

5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) (1-6mg/kg/day) also in combination with carbidopa to correct CNS serotonin deficiency has shown additional clinical benefit in some.

Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4; sapropterin dihydrocloride) may in theory be of benefit, although none was reported in four patients treated for only a short time [Friedman et al 2006, Friedman et al 2012]. Note that it is difficult to achieve adequate CNS levels of BH4 due to limited transport across the blood brain barrier.

Other agents used when L-dopa/5HTP/carbidopa are not tolerated or sufficiently effective which have shown benefit in single or small numbers of patients include:

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (selegeline)

Serotonin reuptake inhibitors (sertraline)

Melatonin

Dopamine agonists (bromocriptine, pramipexole)

Anticholinergics

Methylphenidate

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Physical, occupational, and speech therapy may improve or maintain function.

Surveillance



Data are insufficient to determine how frequently CSF levels of dopamine and serotonin metabolites should be evaluated and whether these levels should be used to adjust medication doses. Practices range from at least annual assessment of CNS neurotransmitter metabolites to adjustment of neurotransmitter precursor therapy based solely on clinical manifestations.

Because clinical manifestations are more difficult to assess in children, it would seem prudent to evaluate CSF neurotransmitter metabolites two to four times yearly in children younger than age two years and at least yearly in children younger than age ten years.

Note: Plasma prolactin levels may inversely correlate with CNS dopamine levels but are neither a sensitive nor specific marker [Leuzzi et al 2002, Furukawa et al 2003, Concolino et al 2008].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Although adverse events with specific agents have not been reported in persons with SRD, several should be avoided on a theoretic basis including:

Sulfa drugs, which impair BH4 biosynthesis by inhibiting sepiapterin reductase [Haruki et al 2013]

Methotrexate, which inhibits dihydropteridine reductase, an enzyme involved in BH4 regeneration [Woody & Brewster 1990]

Nitrous oxide, which may impair folate metabolism [Wyatt & Gill 1999]

Neuroleptics and other dopamine antagonists (e.g., metoclopramide)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



While no data on outcomes are available, it is appropriate to use molecular genetic testing for the SPR pathogenic variants identified in the proband and/or analysis of CSF neurotransmitter metabolites and pterins to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an affected individual in order to identify as soon as possible those who would benefit from early initiation of treatment to correct CNS dopamine and serotonin deficiency.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



No pregnancies have been reported to date in women with SRD.

Based on reports that suggest that L-dopa may be advantageous during pregnancy in women with GTP cyclohydrolase 1-deficient dopa-responsive dystonia (DYT-GCH1), it would seem prudent for women with SRD to continue L-dopa therapy during pregnancy [Trender-Gerhard et al 2009, Watanabe & Matsubara 2012].

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.