

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Stickler syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Evaluation of palate by a craniofacial specialist Baseline ophthalmologic examination Baseline audiogram Directed history to elicit complaints suggestive of mitral valve prolapse (MVP), such as episodic tachycardia and chest pain. If symptoms are present, referral to a cardiologist should be made. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Craniofacial. Infants with Robin sequence need immediate attention from specialists in otolaryngology and pediatric critical care, as they may require tracheostomy to ensure a competent airway. It is recommended that evaluation and management occur in a comprehensive craniofacial clinic that provides all the necessary services, including otolaryngology, plastic surgery, oral and maxillofacial surgery, pediatric dentistry, orthodontics, and medical genetics. In most individuals, micrognathia tends to become less prominent over time, allowing for removal of the tracheostomy. However, in some individuals, significant micrognathia persists, causing orthodontic problems. In these individuals, a mandibular advancement procedure is often required to correct the malocclusion. Ophthalmologic. Refractive errors should be corrected with spectacles. Individuals with Stickler syndrome should be advised of the symptoms associated with retinal detachment and the need for immediate evaluation and treatment when such symptoms occur. Audiologic. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness Overview. Otitis media may be a recurrent problem secondary to palatal abnormalities. Myringotomy tubes are often required. Joints. Treatment of arthropathy is symptomatic and includes using over-the-counter anti-inflammatory medications before and after physical activity.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Individuals with mitral valve prolapse may need antibiotic prophylaxis for certain surgical procedures.

Surveillance

 Annual examination by a vitreoretinal specialist is appropriate. Follow-up audiologic evaluations are appropriate every six months through age five years, and annually thereafter. While the prevalence of mitral valve prolapse (MVP) among affected individuals is unclear, all individuals with Stickler syndrome should be screened for MVP through routine physical examination. More advanced testing (e.g., echocardiogram) should be reserved for those with suggestive symptoms.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Affected individuals should be advised to avoid activities that may lead to traumatic retinal detachment (e.g., contact sports). At present, no prophylactic therapies to minimize joint damage in affected individuals exist. Some physicians recommend avoiding physical activities that involve high impact to the joints in an effort to delay the onset of the arthropathy. While this recommendation seems logical, there are no data to support it.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Because of the variable expression of Stickler syndrome [Faber et al 2000], it is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband as well as other at-risk relatives in order to identify those who warrant ongoing evaluation (see Surveillance). Evaluation can be done in one of two ways: By documenting medical history and performing physical examination and ophthalmologic, audiologic, and radiographic assessments. The examination of childhood photographs may be helpful in the assessment of craniofacial findings of adults, since the craniofacial findings characteristic of Stickler syndrome may become less distinctive with age. By molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known It is recommended that relatives at risk in whom the diagnosis of Stickler syndrome cannot be excluded with certainty be followed for potential complications. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.