http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/stsl

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with sitosterolemia, the following evaluations are recommended: Measurement of plasma concentrations of plant sterols (primarily beta-sitosterol and campesterol) and cholesterol, if not measured at the time of diagnosis Determination of the size, number, and distribution of xanthomas (tendon and tuberous) Depending on the age of the patient, cardiology consultation to evaluate for atherosclerosis and cardiac valve abnormalities with consideration of coronary arteriography as needed Complete blood count with smear to look for platelet abnormalities and/or thrombocytopenia Evaluation for possible hemolysis/ hemolytic anemia Monitoring liver function (e.g., albumin, ALT, AST, ALP, bilirubin) [Miettinen et al 2006] Evaluation for arthralgias and/or arthritis If splenomegaly is significant, consultation with a hematologist and gastroenterologist

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment aims to reduce plasma concentration of plant sterols to as close as possible to normal concentrations (i.e., <1 mg/dL), to control plasma concentration of cholesterol, and to prevent xanthoma formation and/or reduce the size and number of xanthomas. Historically, treatment strategies included dietary restriction of intake of both animal- and plant-based sterols, ileal bypass surgery, and/or hepatic transplantation [Salen et al 2004, Wang et al 2004, Miettinen et al 2006, Lütjohann et al 2008, Niu et al 2010, Tsubakio-Yamamoto et al 2010]. Some of these treatments have only been partially effective. Current treatment therapies focus on the following: A diet low in shellfish sterols and plant sterols (i.e., avoidance of vegetable oils, margarine, nuts, seeds, avocados, chocolate, and shellfish) in conjunction with ezetimibe or other medications The sterol absorption inhibitor: ezetimibe (10 mg/d) [Salen et al 2004, Salen et al 2006, Lütjohann et al 2008, Musliner et al 2008, Niu et al 2010, Tsubakio-Yamamoto et al 2010], which alone may be sufficient Bile acid sequestrants such as cholestryramine (8-15 g/d) which may be considered in those with incomplete response to ezetimibe Treatments should begin at the time of diagnosis. When tolerated, the combined treatments can decrease the plasma concentrations of cholesterol and sitosterol by 10% to 50%. Often existing xanthomas regress. Partial ileal bypass surgery (i.e., shortening of the ileum) has been used to increase intestinal bile acid loss. Partial or complete ileal bypass surgery in persons with sitosterolemia has resulted in at least 50% reduction of plasma and cellular sterol and stanol levels [Nguyen et al 1988, Nguyen et al 1990]. Arthritis, arthralgias, anemia, thromobocytopenia, and/or splenomegaly require treatment, the first step being management of the sitosterolemia, followed by routine management of the finding (by the appropriate consultants) as needed. Sitosterolemia does not respond to standard statin treatment.

Surveillance

Monitor plasma concentrations of plant sterols (primarily beta-sitosterol and campesterol) and cholesterol, and the size, number, and distribution of xanthomas [Kidambi & Patel 2008] at least every six to 12 months. Monitor platelet count for thrombocytopenia, CBC for evidence of hemolytic anemia, and liver enzymes for elevation beginning at the time of diagnosis with the frequency determined by the severity of the clinical and biochemical findings. In those with longstanding untreated sitosterolemia, surveillance for atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease is indicated, with the level of monitoring determined by the severity of the clinical and biochemical findings.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Margarines and other products containing stanols (e.g., campestanol and sitostanol), which are recommended for use by persons with hypercholesterolemia, are contraindicated in those with sitosterolemia as they can exacerbate plant stanol accumulation [Connor et al 2005]. Note: Foods with high plant sterol content including shellfish, vegetable oils, margarine, nuts, avocados, and chocolate should be taken in moderation due to increased intestinal absorption of plant sterols in those with sitosterolemia [Bhattacharyya & Connor 1974].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Early diagnosis of at-risk relatives either through measurement of plasma concentrations of plant sterols or through molecular genetic testing (if the family-specific pathogenic variants are known) allows early institution of treatment and surveillance to optimize outcome. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Guidelines for the management of women with sitosterolemia during pregnancy have not been established. While ezetimibe is indicated as therapy for individuals with sitosterolemia, no studies have been published on the fetal effects of ezetimibe when used during human pregnancy. Therefore, ezetimibe should be used with caution during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Asymptomatic individuals identified by molecular genetic testing in research studies are treated to maintain near-normal plasma plant sterol concentrations. Early treatment before xanthomas or other manifestations are present may prevent clinical manifestations. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.