http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/stxbp1-ee

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with STXBP1 encephalopathy with epilepsy, the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic evaluation Epilepsy consultation (if not done at the time of initial assessment) Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Global developmental delay, cognitive dysfunction and intellectual disability. Physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and speech-language therapy can be beneficial. Seizure management is symptomatic. The most commonly used AEDs were phenobarbital, valproic acid, and vigabatrin. Clobazam, zonisamide, lamotrigine, and oxcarbamazepine have also been used. In single cases, a response to vigabatrin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, or valproic acid and levetiracetam has been reported [Hamdan et al 2009, Deprez et al 2010, Saitsu et al 2010, Mignot et al 2011, Weckhuysen et al 2013, Barcia et al 2014, Romaniello et al 2014, Keogh et al 2015, Romaniello et al 2015, Dilena et al 2016, Yamamoto et al 2016]. In more than 20% of affected individuals two or more AEDs were used in combination. About 25% of affected individuals were refractory to AED therapy. In approximately 20% of affected individuals, seizures were controlled with one or more than one combined anti-seizure medication. In individuals who became seizure free, AEDs were discontinued between one month and 5.5 years after treatment began [Deprez et al 2010, Romaniello et al 2015, Sampaio et al 2015]. The longest seizure-free period documented following discontinuation of AEDs was approximately 11 years [Deprez et al 2010]. In about 1% of affected individuals the ketogenic diet was used for seizure management. Response to the ketogenic diet was either slight or none [Saitsu et al 2011, Weckhuysen et al 2013]. Epilepsy surgery was the treatment of choice in two affected individuals: one became seizure free following corpus callosotomy [Otsuka et al 2010]; the other had a significant reduction in seizure frequency following resection of focal cortical dysplasia [Weckhuysen et al 2013]. 
            Other neurologic findings Severe dystonia, dyskinesia, or choreoathetosis can be treated with monoamine depleters or dopaminergic agents. Hypotonia may lead to feeding difficulties and associated recurrent aspiration pneumonia which may require G-tube placement. Behavior disorders can be managed symptomatically with behavioral therapies by psychologists or behavior therapists.

Surveillance

 There are no published guidelines for surveillance of individuals diagnosed with STXBP1 encephalopathy with epilepsy. The following assessments and investigations can be performed as needed: Neuropsychological assessment EEG

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.