http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/suclg1-mtddepl

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with SUCLG1-related mtDNA depletion syndrome the following evaluations are recommended: Comprehensive neurologic examination and developmental/cognitive assessment. The following diagnostic modalities can be considered to assess the degree of neurologic involvement: Brain MRI (if not performed during the diagnostic evaluation) to establish the degree of central nervous system involvement EEG if seizures are suspected Echocardiogram to assess for cardiomyopathy Liver function tests including transaminases, albumin, total and direct bilirubin, and coagulation profile. Audiology evaluation Ophthalmologic examination for evidence of ptosis and/or strabismus Nutritional evaluation and swallowing assessment for feeding difficulties and growth failure Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Management is best provided by a multidisciplinary team including specialists in neurology, audiology, child development, gastroenterology, cardiology, nutrition, and clinical genetics. Treatments include the following: Physical therapy to help maintain muscle function and prevent joint contractures Standard treatment with antiepileptic drugs for seizures Nutritional support by a dietitian and the use of a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube feedings to address feeding difficulties and failure to thrive Chest physiotherapy, aggressive antibiotic treatment of chest infections, and artificial ventilation (including assisted nasal ventilation or intubation and the use of a tracheostomy and ventilator) for respiratory insufficiency. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and hepatopathy, when present, require standard management by cardiologists and hepatologists, respectively.

Surveillance

No clinical guidelines for surveillance are available. The following evaluations are suggested, with frequency varying according to the needs of the child: Developmental and neurologic assessment Nutritional and growth assessment Echocardiogram Liver function tests Hearing evaluation Ophthalmologic examination

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

A group of mtDNA depletion syndromes is caused by defects in genes encoding proteins involved in maintenance of the mitochondrial deoxyribonucleotide pool. Because in vitro experimental studies have demonstrated improved mtDNA content following deoxyribonucleotide supplementation, this could potentially be a treatment for some mtDNA depletion syndromes [Cámara et al 2014]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.