http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sys-h

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with inherited systemic hyalinosis, the following evaluations should be considered: Complete nutritional evaluation, including evaluation for intestinal malabsorption Evaluation for immune deficiency Because hyalinosis of the heart has been reported, consideration of echocardiogram Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations


Pain Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and opiates help control pain. Agents such as gabapentin should be considered. Gentle handling may reduce pain that is worsened with movement. Splinting of affected joints may provide comfort. When passive movement of joint contractures is painful, physiotherapy should be carried out with care; in some cases physiotherapy is not tolerated because of pain. Consultation with a pain management specialist may be helpful. Palliative care may be an option in severe cases. 
Failure to thrive Early consideration should be given to nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube feeding. Nutrition should be tailored for the possibility for malabsorption or lymphangiectasia. A nutritionist should follow affected individuals. 
Protein-losing enteropathy Chronic diarrhea and protein-losing enteropathy with subsequent edema are treated with hydration and albumin infusions; an effective long-term treatment is lacking. The effectiveness of dietary therapies with intestinal lymphangiectasia is not known. Skin nodules, gingival thickening, and lesions of the mouth. Lesions that obstruct the airway or interfere with oral intake are particularly problematic; surgical excision is an option that has been used, but lesions may recur. Dermatitis. Intertriginous, perianal, and neck areas appear to be particularly prone to dermatitis and should be treated appropriately. Perianal masses may be excised, but may recur. Joint contractures. Contractures are typically progressive. Treatment of contractures with physiotherapy should be performed with care because of pain. 
Immune system/Infections Infections are treated based on the site of infection and causative agent. An immunology evaluation should be considered given the possibility of impaired cellular immune responses and immunoglobulin levels [Klebanova & Schwindt 2009]. Other. Given the chronic nature of this disorder in an individual with normal intelligence, family counseling should be considered in order to develop coping strategies for both the patient and the immediate family.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Anesthesiologists should be aware of the diagnosis given the difficulty of endotracheal intubation and management in some affected individuals as a result of anatomy and gingival thickening [Pollard et al 2008, Qasem et al 2012]. Significant complication with anesthesia has been reported [El-Kamah & Mostafa 2009].

Surveillance

Routine nutritional assessment is appropriate. Periodic assessment for gastrointestinal malabsorption may aid in optimizing nutritional status.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The role of surgery in management of lesions is unclear since lesions appear to recur.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.