

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with thrombocytopenia absent radius (TAR) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Platelet count if this has not been completed Orthopedic evaluation of both upper and lower limbs Echocardiography to assess for cardiac anomalies Evaluation of renal structure and function Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 The treatment for thrombocytopenia is platelet transfusion as needed. Bone marrow transplantation is generally not indicated, given the transient nature of the thrombocytopenia. The use of central venous catheters as an alternative to venipuncture has been suggested to reduce the pain associated with repeated procedures [Coccia et al 2012]. Orthopedic intervention is indicated to maximize function of limbs, with such intervention including prostheses, orthoses, adaptive devices, and surgery [McLaurin et al 1999, Al Kaissi et al 2015].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Avoidance of cow’s milk lessens the severity of gastroenteritis and reduces exacerbations of thrombocytopenia (in older children).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Frequent transfusion with platelets can lead to alloimmunization and increased risk of infection. It is therefore recommended that platelet transfusion in older individuals not be done until platelet counts fall below a particular threshold (10/nL). Note: The threshold for platelet transfusion in newborns is unknown.

Surveillance

 Platelet count is indicated whenever evidence of increased bleeding tendency (bruising, petechiae) occurs.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid cow’s milk to reduce the severity of gastroenteritis and associated thrombocytopenia (in older children).

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Fewer than ten pregnancies have been reported in women with TAR syndrome. Almost all develop thrombocytopenia during pregnancy. In one, corticosteroids appeared to be fairly successful in treating the thrombocytopenia [Bot-Robin et al 2011]. In one pregnant woman with TAR syndrome, exacerbation of her thrombocytopenia preceded the development of preeclampsia. Other considerations during pregnancy include potential difficulties with administration of regional anesthetics (given potential difficulties with vascular access) and difficulties accessing the airway for general anesthesia [Wax et al 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.