http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/tardbp-als

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with TARDBP-related ALS (or any other form of ALS), the following evaluations are recommended: EMG/NCS to document the regions of involvement Pulmonary function testing to detect and stage respiratory involvement Speech and swallowing evaluation if dysarthria and/or dysphagia are present, to direct care to minimize risk of aspiration and to initiate augmentative communication strategies for possible loss of verbal communication Physical and occupational therapy evaluation to determine what adaptive devices are needed to maximize function Nutritional evaluation Screening for depression and need for psychosocial support Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 The management of TARDBP-related ALS is identical to that of ALS resulting from other causes, and is outlined in the American Academy of Neurology practice parameter on this topic [Miller et al 2009a, Miller et al 2009b]. Spasticity can be treated with a spasmolytic such as baclofen or a benzodiazepine. Pseudobulbar affect can be treated with a tricyclic antidepressant or combination of quinidine and dextromethorphan. Sialorrhea is often managed with anticholinergic medications (tricyclic antidepressants, scopolamine, atropine drops) or botulinum toxin injection of the salivary glands. Antidepressants are often required to treat concurrent depression. Riluzole is the only FDA-approved treatment for any type of ALS. Although there are no efficacy data specifically for TARDBP-related ALS, strong consideration should be given to its use [Miller et al 2007]. Note: See Author Notes, Miller Laboratory for a link to investigative reports on accurate assessments of the risks and benefits of specific proposed therapies.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Adequate nutrition and weight maintenance are essential. Percutaneous gastrostomy is often appropriate to maintain adequate caloric intake in persons with significant bulbar involvement. Joint contractures can occur, are often painful, and can interfere with care giving. Appropriate bracing and stretching can minimize contractures. Early initiation of noninvasive ventilation has been shown to prolong survival [Farrero et al 2005].

Surveillance

 Monitoring of the forced vital capacity and other parameters of ventilation should be performed at clinic visits to determine the appropriate time to offer noninvasive ventilation. Routine screening for depression at clinic visits is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Long-term use of minocycline, which was studied in a randomized-controlled trial in individuals with ALS, was associated with worse outcomes [Gordon et al 2007]. Excessive exercise to the point of inducing fatigue in already weakened muscles is cautioned against by many practitioners based on experience.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Although no current clinical trials are specifically designed to target TARDBP-related ALS, many ongoing trials address the broader category of ALS. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.