http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/tay-sachs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with hexosaminidase A deficiency, the following are recommended: Complete history and physical examination, including ophthalmologic examination Family history, including ethnicity Referral to a pediatric neurologist and/or ophthalmologist

Treatment of Manifestations

For the most part, treatment for Tay-Sachs disease is supportive and directed to providing adequate nutrition and hydration, managing infectious disease, protecting the airway, and controlling seizures. Seizure control can usually be achieved using conventional antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) such as benzodiazepines, phenytoins, and/or barbiturates. However, seizures are progressive and change in type and severity; thus, over time changes in the dose or type of AEDs may be necessary for optimal seizure control. For older individuals with adult-onset hexosaminidase A deficiency who have psychiatric manifestations, conventional antipsychotic or antidepressant therapy may be used; but the clinical response is unpredictable and generally poor. Treatment with lithium salts and electroconvulsive therapy has been reported to be beneficial, at least in ameliorating for a period the episodes of psychotic depression.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

As the child with the acute infantile form (Tay-Sachs disease) becomes more debilitated and disabled, good bowel management becomes essential. Good hydration, food additives, stool softeners, laxatives, and other measures should be employed to avoid severe constipation.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Early experimental intravenous enzyme replacement trials were unsuccessful, as the large molecular weight enzyme did not cross the blood-brain barrier [reviewed in Desnick & Kaback 2001]. Central nervous system enzyme replacement or neuronal-corrective gene therapy are experimental considerations [Matsuoka et al 2011, Tsuji et al 2011]. A clinical trial used HEX A inhibitors to reduce the biosynthesis of glycosphingolipid precursors to GM2 ganglioside. Although one such agent, N-deoxynojirimycin, showed some efficacy with the non-CNS neuronal storage disorder, type I Gaucher disease [Pastores et al 2005], no improvement was observed in a trial of substrate reduction therapy for individuals with adult-onset GM2 gangliosidosis [Shapiro et al 2009]. Preclinical studies for individuals with later-onset Tay-Sachs disease are underway to evaluate pharmacologic chaperone therapy using an immuno sugar that is an active site inhibitor of HEX A activity [Clarke et al 2011]. Since residual enzyme activity is very low (but detectable), chaperone therapy is designed to rescue newly synthesized mutant enzymes in the endoplasmic reticulum before they are removed for degradation and to deliver them to the lysosome where they may function [Rountree et al 2009]. For studies of pathogenesis and preclinical evaluation of various therapeutic strategies, animal models are available. A genetically engineered mouse model of infantile hexosaminidase A deficiency (TSD) has been constructed and can be used to evaluate innovative treatment modalities. Recently, a sheep model of TSD with HEX A deficiency was identified in which affected animals progressively accumulate GM2 ganglioside, have neurologic pathology, and experience a neurodegenerative clinical course [Torres et al 2010]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

The poor response to tricyclic antidepressants and phenothiazines has been attributed to the observation that these drugs inhibit HEX A enzymatic activity in vitro and induce lysosomal lipidosis in fibroblasts and accumulation of lipids in experimental animals in vivo. Several attempts have been made at purified enzyme replacement therapy for children with acute infantile hexosaminidase A deficiency; none has been successful. Cellular infusions and even bone marrow transplantation have been attempted, with no evidence of benefit.