http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/tbs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Townes-Brocks syndrome (TBS), the following evaluations are recommended: Hearing. Hearing evaluation as soon as the diagnosis of TBS is suspected (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview) Kidneys. Renal ultrasound examination and routine laboratory tests for renal function Heart. Baseline evaluation by a cardiologist including an echocardiogram Eyes. Ophthalmology examination to evaluate for ocular features of TBS and atypical finding of Duane anomaly. Other. Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are indicated: Imperforate anus. Immediate surgical intervention is required. Hearing loss. Significant impairment requires early treatment, typically with hearing aids (see Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview). Thumb malformations. Severe malformations of the hands may require surgery (e.g., removal of additional thumbs). Renal. Impaired renal function requires continuous monitoring, hemodialysis, and possibly kidney transplantation. Heart defects. Congenital heart defects may require surgery or medical treatment by a cardiologist.

Surveillance

Annual hearing evaluation is indicated. Renal function should be regularly monitored in all individuals with and without renal anomalies, even if no impairment of renal function is detected on initial examination.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Medications that cause renal or otic toxicity should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives. If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, clinical evaluation for physical features, hearing problems, renal disease, and heart defects can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.