

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with TFR2-related hereditary hemochromatosis (TFR2-HHC), the following are recommended (based on recommendations for HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis): Liver biopsy for evaluation of abnormal liver function tests and establishing prognosis when serum ferritin concentration is greater than 1000 ng/mL and/or when hepatomegaly is present [Guyader et al 1998] Serum concentration of gonadotropins (FSH and LH) to assess pituitary function. Depending on the results, a GnRH stimulation test may be necessary. Serum concentration of testosterone to assess testicular function; serum concentration of estradiol to assess ovarian function Radiographs of the affected joint(s) to assess persistent arthralgia or arthropathy Cardiac evaluation (ECG and echocardiography) for all symptomatic individuals and those with severe iron overload (ferritin >1000 ng/mL) Screening for diabetes mellitus by fasting serum glucose concentration and oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)

Treatment of Manifestations

 The following recommendations are based on guidelines proposed for HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis in Europe [European Association for the Study of the Liver 2010] (full text) and an expert review [Adams & Barton 2010]. However, it should be emphasized that since TFR2-HHC is rare and may progress differently from HFE-associated hemochromatosis, individual treatment is important. Individuals with increased serum ferritin concentration should be treated by the same protocol as for HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis. Therapeutic phlebotomy. Periodic phlebotomy (i.e., removal of a unit of blood) is a simple, inexpensive, safe, and effective way to remove excess iron. Each unit of blood (400-500 mL) with a hematocrit of 40% contains approximately 160-200 mg of iron. The usual therapy is weekly phlebotomy; however, twice weekly phlebotomy may be useful initially to accelerate iron depletion. On average, men require removal of twice as many units of blood as women. Weekly phlebotomy is carried out until the serum ferritin concentration is 100 ng/mL or lower. Serum ferritin concentration should be measured following each phlebotomy or every other phlebotomy [Adams & Barton 2010]: Once the serum ferritin concentration is approximately 50 ng/mL, monitoring serum ferritin concentration every three to four months is adequate. If the serum ferritin concentration is 50 ng/mL or higher despite a significant reduction in hematocrit, phlebotomies need to be spaced further apart. Note: Although experience is limited because of the small number of affected individuals identified worldwide, it should be noted that transferrin saturation remains high in TFR2-related hereditary hemochromatosis when serum ferritin concentration is low (<50 ng/mL), even after intensive phlebotomy [Girelli et al 2011; Camaschella & Roetto, unpublished observation]. Maintenance therapy. The goal is to maintain serum ferritin concentration around 50 ng/mL and transferrin-iron saturation below 50%. Phlebotomy to prevent reaccumulation of iron is performed about every three to four months for men and once or twice a year for women. Iron chelation therapy is not recommended unless an individual has an elevated serum ferritin concentration and concomitant anemia that makes therapeutic phlebotomy impossible. Iron chelators such as subcutaneous desferrioxamine are used as a first choice in case of concomitant anemia [Riva et al 2004] or cardiac dysfunction. Note: At present, oral iron chelators are not available to treat hemochromatosis. However, a phase I/II trial has been completed with daily administration of deferasirox in persons with newly diagnosed HFE-HHC with iron overload and without evidence of liver cirrhosis. The trial demonstrated that treatment is feasible, safe, and effective; side effects were mostly related to the GI tract [Phatak et al 2010]. 
            Treatment of clinical complications Cirrhosis should be treated and followed up as in other conditions. Although cirrhosis is not reversible by phlebotomy, individuals with cirrhosis benefit from iron removal in that it reduces the risk of hepatocellular cancer. Hypogonadism is irreversible and requires lifelong hormone replacement therapy in males and females. Use of gonadotropins has successfully restored fertility and induced pregnancy in women who have been treated for other forms of hemochromatosis. Arthropathy requires nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and is barely influenced by phlebotomy. In some cases, joint replacement has been performed. Cardiac failure is treated with diuretics, ACE inhibitors, cardiac glycosides, and iron chelation by intravenous or subcutaneous deferioxamine. Diabetes mellitus may require lifelong insulin treatment. Iron removal may improve control of diabetes mellitus but cannot reestablish normal glucose metabolism.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 In affected individuals with increased serum ferritin concentration, prevention of primary manifestations is accomplished by weekly phlebotomy to deplete iron stores (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Surveillance

 Once the serum ferritin concentration is around 50 ng/mL, monitoring serum ferritin concentration every three to four months is adequate. Although hepatocellular carcinoma has not been reported in individuals with TFR2-associated hereditary hemochromatosis, surveillance for its development should be performed in persons with cirrhosis by monitoring liver ultrasound examinations and serum concentrations of alpha-fetoprotein, as in persons with cirrhosis with HFE-associated hereditary hemochromatosis.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Medicinal iron Mineral supplements Excess vitamin C Uncooked seafood (because of the risk of infection from microorganisms thriving under conditions of excess iron) For those with hepatic involvement, alcohol intake should be restricted because it increases iron absorption and is toxic to the hepatocytes.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, it is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to at-risk relatives to allow early diagnosis and treatment. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Women with hemochromatosis do not need treatment during pregnancy because the fetal utilization of maternal iron effectively reduces the mother’s iron load during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.