http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/thctd

Management

No current published guidelines exist to establish the extent of disease or proper management in an individual diagnosed with MCT8-specific thyroid hormone cell-membrane transporter deficiency. The following recommendations are based on current literature and the authors’ experience.

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease in an affected individual, the following are recommended: Growth parameters Developmental assessment Neurologic evaluation and EEG to assess possible seizures Orthopedic evaluation to assess for possible developing scoliosis or pectus deformities Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

The following treatment is appropriate: Physical, occupational, and speech therapies, if necessary Medications, such as anticholinergics, L-DOPA, carbamazepine, or lioresol, for the treatment of dystonia Glycopyrolate or scopolamine to improve drooling Standard anticonvulsant medication to control seizures, if present Placement of permanent feeding tube to avert malnutrition Note: Thyroid hormone treatment with replacement doses during childhood has no beneficial effect. However, combined treatment with high doses of levothyroxine (L-T4) and propylthiouracil (PTU), which inhibits deiodinase 1, has been shown to ameliorate the hypermetabolic state, with beneficial effects on body weight and heart rate, as seen in several affected individuals [Wémeau et al 2008, Visser et al 2013]. See also Therapies Under Investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Appropriate measures include the following: Braces to prevent joint contractures and orthopedic surgery, if necessary Diet restrictions to prevent aspiration

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes the following: Regular orthopedic evaluations to monitor scoliosis or joint problems Ongoing developmental assessments

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Aspiration of food should be avoided to prevent pneumonia. Administration of L-T4 or L-T3 alone can exacerbate the high serum T3 levels and the resulting hypermetabolism.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In a recent report, two unaffected heterozygous pregnant women with unaffected fetuses were treated with L-T4 in the second half of pregnancy [Ramos et al 2011]. It is unclear if this had any effect, either beneficial or detrimental, on the fetus. Of note, many unaffected heterozygous mothers have given birth to normal unaffected children without any prenatal treatment.

Therapies Under Investigation

Diiodothyropropionic acid (DITPA), a thyroid hormone analog that does not require MCT8 for transfer into cells, has been evaluated as a treatment in both a mouse model of Mct8 deficiency and in humans with MCT8-specific thyroid hormone cell-membrane transporter deficiency [Di Cosmo et al 2009, Verge et al 2012]. DITPA therapy was given to four affected children with subsequent improvement in the hypermetabolic state; however, no significant neurologic improvement was obtained with this therapy. Consideration is being given to DITPA treatment during pregnancy, however such treatment has not been used to date, and there is no information on whether it will be effective. Recently another analog TETRAC (3, 3’, 5, 5’-tetraiodothyroacetic acid) has been tested in mice with Mct8 deficiency [Horn et al 2013]. TETRAC treatment was able to promote TH-dependent neuronal differentiation in some brain areas but was ineffective in suppressing TRH (thyrotropin releasing hormone) in the hypothalamus. The efficacy of TETRAC therapy may vary among distinct neuronal populations or among different genes that are controlled by TH in a positive or negative manner. However, peripheral tissue thyrotoxicity in Mct8-deficient mice was not significantly ameliorated by TETRAC therapy. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.