http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/thdrd

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) deficiency, the following are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Clinical examination to assess the severity of motor disturbances

Evaluation for associated psychiatric symptoms or cognitive impairments

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



In individuals with TH deficiency, initial use of a levodopa (combined with a decarboxylase inhibitor) dose of 0.5-3 mg/kg (body weight)/day, divided into three to six doses, has been recommended [Willemsen et al 2010, Yeung et al 2011, Pons et al 2013]. Nevertheless, it is possible that even at the lowest initial dosage recommended (i.e., 0.5 mg/kg/day), some individuals with the very severe form of TH deficiency (see Table 2) will develop intolerable dyskinesias [Zafeiriou et al 2009, Pons et al 2013].

When tolerated, the dose of levodopa can be increased gradually. However, with the exception of those with mild TH-deficient DRD (see Table 2), it is often difficult to increase levodopa doses smoothly in affected individuals due to the risk of developing severe dyskinesias. In such individuals, combined administration of levodopa and selegiline (a monoamine oxidase B inhibitor, which inhibits dopamine degradation) has been recommended [Dionisi-Vici et al 2000, Häussler et al 2001, Willemsen et al 2010, Yeung et al 2011, Leuzzi et al 2017].

As reported in compound heterozygotes for GCH1 pathogenic variants [Furukawa et al 2004a], amantadine (an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist) can suppress dopa-induced dyskinesias, which develop at initiation of levodopa therapy, in some individuals with TH deficiency [Pons et al 2013].

Mild form (TH-deficient DRD). Individuals demonstrate complete responsiveness of symptoms to levodopa treatment. Such an excellent response without any motor adverse effects of chronic levodopa therapy for more than 30 years has been confirmed in some individuals with TH-deficient DRD [Swaans et al 2000, Schiller et al 2004].

Severe form (TH-deficient infantile parkinsonism with motor delay). Individuals show a marked response to levodopa. However, in contrast to TH-deficient DRD, the responsiveness is generally not complete and/or it takes several months or even years before full effects of treatment become established. Some individuals with the severe form of TH deficiency are hypersensitive to levodopa and are prone to intolerable dyskinesias at initiation of levodopa therapy; this hypersensitivity necessitates use of very low initial doses of levodopa [Grattan-Smith et al 2002, Yeung et al 2006, Clot et al 2009, Doummar et al 2009, Yeung et al 2011].

Very severe form (TH-deficient progressive infantile encephalopathy). Individuals are extremely sensitive to levodopa. Accordingly, treatment with levodopa is often limited by severe dyskinesias. Some individuals with the very severe form of TH deficiency develop intolerable dyskinesias even at doses of 0.2 to 1.5 mg/kg/day levodopa and no or only minimal improvement is observed [de Lonlay et al 2000, Hoffmann et al 2003, Zafeiriou et al 2009].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



As described in Treatment of Manifestations, appropriate levodopa therapy can reverse symptoms and signs of TH-deficient DRD; thus, levodopa treatment from early infancy may not be required to prevent disease manifestations in this mild form of TH deficiency.

Levodopa therapy from early infancy may prevent manifestations of some symptoms and signs in TH-deficient infantile parkinsonism with motor delay; however, no levodopa trials in the early postnatal period of infants with this type of TH deficiency and biallelic TH pathogenic variants have been reported.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Additional side effects associated with peak-dose levodopa include gastroesophageal reflux, vomiting, or significant suppression of appetite leading to poor growth. Although these problems may be most evident in the first few weeks of onset of levodopa treatment, close monitoring of symptoms and ongoing adjustment of levodopa dosing in conjunction with appropriate supportive intervention as needed help in management.

Surveillance



Examination by a movement disorder specialist in pediatric or adult neurology at least several times yearly is recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



The prokinetic agent Reglan®, commonly used for treatment of bowel dysmotility, is contraindicated in individuals with TH deficiency because of its antidopaminergic activity. Use of Reglan® or related antidopaminergic agents, including some antipsychotic medications, could result in a dystonic crisis.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment.

Evaluations include:

Clinical examination to identify mild dystonic and/or parkinsonian symptoms or unexplained gait disorders;

Molecular genetic testing if the TH pathogenic variants have been identified in the family.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.