http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/timothy

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Timothy syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Electrocardiogram Echocardiogram Developmental and neurologic assessment Orthopedist consulation for skeletal abnormalities Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Note: All medical procedures requiring anesthesia should be performed with caution (see Prevention of Secondary Complications). 
Long QT interval Beta-blockers. While most individuals with Timothy syndrome are treated with beta-blockers to maintain QT interval stability and thereby prevent ventricular tachyarrhythmia, no data concerning the effectiveness of beta-blockers are available. Verapamil and ranolazine have been reported effective in case reports. However, no cohort-based analysis of the efficacy of pharmacologic therapy is available. Pacemaker. To control 2:1 AV block and resultant bradycardia, a pacemaker can be placed with general success within the first days of life. Implants. The implantable cardioverter defibrillator is most important in preventing sudden cardiac death in individuals with Timothy syndrome. An implant should be considered in every individual with confirmed diagnosis as soon as body weight allows the procedure (as determined by the treating clinician). Congenital heart defects. Standard treatment is indicated. Respiratory infections. Standard treatment (antibiotic therapy, steroids) is indicated. The possibility of reduced immune response should be considered. Surgical release of syndactyly. Standard treatment is indicated.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Arrhythmias in Timothy syndrome must be prevented with the standard therapy described in Treatment of Manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Anesthesia is a known trigger for cardiac arrhythmia in individuals with Timothy syndrome. Therefore, any surgical intervention must be performed under close cardiac monitoring. Because clinical experience with Timothy syndrome is scarce, all compounds used for general anesthesia should be regarded as potentially dangerous. Prevention of extracardiac complications (including use of appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis/therapy before surgical intervention) must always be considered.

Surveillance

Surveillance includes the following: Monitoring of serum glucose concentrations, especially in individuals treated with beta-blockers, which may mask hypoglycemic symptoms A complete cardiac evaluation based on the status of the individual patient

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided: All drugs reported to prolong QT interval (CredibleMeds®) Drugs and dietary practices that could lead to hypoglycemia

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Using molecular genetic testing for the CACNA1C pathogenic variants found in the proband, it is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Pharmacologic therapies under investigation to shorten ventricular repolarization, restore one-to-one conduction, and reduce the risk of arrhythmias include sodium channel blockers and calcium channel blockers. Although verapamil has been used in one case [Jacobs et al 2006] and the partial effectiveness of sodium channel blockers mexiletine and ranolazine has been reported for two patients [Shah et al 2012, Gao et al 2013], no data are available to support their routine use in Timothy syndrome. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.