http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/tk2-mtddepl

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with TK2-related mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, myopathic form, the following evaluations are recommended: Neurology consultation with comprehensive neurologic examination Developmental evaluation Occupational therapy assessment, including oromotor functions such as chewing and swallowing Physical therapy consultation Consultation with a pediatric pulmonologist to evaluate pulmonary function Brain MRI in patients with encephalopathy or seizures Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

Currently there is no definitive treatment. Management should involve a multidisciplinary team. Feeding difficulties should be managed aggressively, including use of a nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube when the risk of aspiration is high. Physical therapy can help maintain muscle function and prevent joint contractures. A physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R) specialist can be helpful for individuals with walking difficulty. As mobility becomes increasingly restricted, the use of a wheelchair should be considered. Early referral to a pediatric pulmonologist is recommended for assessment of pulmonary function and the need for chest physiotherapy to improve pulmonary function and reduce the risk of pulmonary infection. Pulmonary infection should be treated urgently in a standard manner to prevent deterioration in pulmonary function capacity. Once the patient becomes ventilator dependent due to respiratory compromise, chest physiotherapy can help reduce the risk of pulmonary infection.

Surveillance

Although no clinical guidelines are available, treating physicians should consider the following: Beginning in infancy: periodic neurodevelopmental assessment and speech/language evaluation by a developmental pediatrician or pediatric neurologist Soon after diagnosis is established: Routine assessments of nutritional status, weight gain, and growth parameters Routine pulmonary function tests, including assessment of blood gases, to monitor for respiratory insufficiency (alveolar hypoventilation and chronic hypercapnia)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.