http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/tps

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and support needs of an individual diagnosed with trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (TRPS), the following should be evaluated. 
For TRPS I and TRPS II Measurement of height Developmental assessment, at younger age for both TRPS I and TRPS II as the distinction may clinically not yet be possible. At an older age, only for TRPS II X-rays of hands, feet, pelvis, and hip, if symptomatic If evidence of osteopenia on x-ray, further investigation of bone mineral density and metabolism may be warranted Dental examination for supernumerary teeth Cardiac evaluation (once) Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor 
For TRPS II only Review of osteochondromas by an orthopedic specialist for evidence of functional limitation Evaluation of vison and hearing as is recommended in all persons with intellectual disability of any cause

Treatment of Manifestations

Management of TRPS is principally supportive.

Ectodermal Features

Hair. Practical advice on hair care and the use of wigs can be beneficial. Dental. Extraction of supernumerary teeth can be considered [Kantaputra et al 2008, Lubinsky & Kantaputra 2016].

Skeletal

Short stature. In those with short stature and proven growth hormone deficiency, human growth hormone therapy may be considered; however, reported results vary. Treatment has infrequently led to an increase in growth velocity [Riedl et al 2004, Stagi et al 2008, Sarafoglou et al 2010, Sohn et al 2012]. Note: When the growth pattern of a child with TRPS is below the normal range for age and sex and is of concern to the family, growth hormone stimulation tests can be performed. If the result is subnormal, GH therapy may be considered [Marques et al 2015] despite reported variable results. Hands. In a single report resection arthrodesis with tension band osteosynthesis stabilized painful ulnar dislocation of the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints in digits with cone-shaped epiphyses [Brenner et al 2004]. Of note, no follow-up or other similar reports are available. Joint pain. Regular simple analgesia (e.g., NSAID or other non-opiates) is the mainstay treatment for joint pain. Physiotherapy may aid mobility. Exercise is to be encouraged, but high-impact or contact sports may pose a risk to those with already impaired mobility. Patients may require support with mobility at school and work. Occupational therapy can benefit many fine-motor tasks and mechanical aids such as electric can openers may ameliorate problems caused by joint anomalies. Prosthetic hip implantation should be considered in those with severe hip dysplasia. Prosthetic hip implantation may be required as early as age 30 years. Such prostheses may require multiple revisions due to their limited life span. Obtaining functional improvement through prosthetic joint surgery can be challenging given the presence of damage to other joints – either in the form of TRPS-related osteoarthritis-like changes or secondary to long-term compensatory stress. Osteopenia. Bisphosphonates can be considered in individuals with TRPS I and bone fragility [Macchiaiolo et al 2014]. Other. Peer support and (if indicated) psychological counseling can be beneficial for individuals who are self-conscious about their physical differences.

For TRPS II Only

Exostoses. In case of clinical problems such as pain, restricted range of motion, or nerve compression, resection of exostoses should be considered [Payne et al 2016, Hereditary Multiple Osteochondromas].

Surveillance


For TRPS I and TRPS II Monitor linear growth in childhood Routine developmental assessments in childhood For TRPS II only. X-ray evaluation of osteochondromas when symptomatic and at the end of puberty (when normal growth of osteochondromas has ceased) to provide a baseline for comparison with any future enlargement

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.