http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/trio-id

Management



Evaluations and Referrals Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with TRIO-related intellectual disability (ID), the evaluations and referrals summarized in Table 2 are recommended.

Note: Some evaluations are age dependent and may not be relevant at the time of initial diagnosis (e.g., recommendation for traits suggestive of an autism spectrum disorder in an infant).


Table 2. 

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis of TRIO-Related Intellectual Disability




System
Evaluation
Comment





Growth

Assessment of growth parameters to identify those w/failure to thrive




ENT / Mouth

Evaluation for dental crowding and/or failed/delayed tooth eruption
Consider referral to dentist or orthodontist.



Gastroenterology / Feeding

Assessment for feeding problems, incl difficulty w/sucking/swallowing, GERD, constipation
Refer to feeding therapist if feeding problems are identified.



Musculoskeletal

Clinical evaluation for scoliosis and/or kyphosis
Radiographic scoliosis survey (x-rays of spine) based on clinical suspicion; consider referral to orthopedic surgeon if scoliosis is present.



Psychiatric / Behavioral

Clinical screening for presence of attention/concentration problems, aggression, and/or traits suggestive of an ASD for individuals age >12 months
Consider referral for formal testing, including Autism Diagnostic Interview (ADI) & Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS).



Other

Multidisciplinary developmental evaluation including motor, speech/language evaluation, general cognitive & vocational skills
Refer to developmental pediatrician and/or developmental psychologist.


Review of medical history for recurrent infections
If present, consider referral to immunologist.


Consultation with clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor






GERD = gastroesophageal reflux disease


ASD = autism spectrum disorder



Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis of TRIO-Related Intellectual Disability

GERD = gastroesophageal reflux disease

ASD = autism spectrum disorder

Treatment of Manifestations



See Table 3.


Table 3. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with TRIO-Related Intellectual Disability




Manifestation
Treatment
Considerations/Other





Dental crowding /

Malocclusion

Standard treatment as recommended by dentist/orthodontist




Poor weight gain / Failure to thrive

Feeding therapy; gastrostomy tube placement may be required for persistent feeding issues.
Dietary diary & calorie counts may be requested.



GERD and/or constipation

Standard treatment(s)




Seizures

Standard treatment(s) as recommended by neurologist




Scoliosis / Kyphosis

Standard treatment as recommended by orthopedist






GERD = gastroesophageal reflux disease



Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with TRIO-Related Intellectual Disability

GERD = gastroesophageal reflux disease

Global Developmental Delay / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues



The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay/intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.

For ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a nationwide federally funded program available in all states.

For ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district may be considered. An evaluation will occur before placement to determine needed services and therapies and will be subsequently written into an individualized education plan (IEP).


For ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function can be developed by the local public school district. Severely affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

For all ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure that appropriate community, state, and educational agencies are involved and to support parents. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States:

Enrollment in Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

Families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction




Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility.

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., orthotics, adaptive strollers).

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function such as feeding, grooming, dressing, and writing.

Oral motor dysfunction. Feeding therapy, typically from an occupational or speech therapist, is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control, assuming the individual is safe to eat by mouth.

Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.

Social/Behavioral Difficulties



Children may qualify for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of autism spectrum disorder, including applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA therapy is individualized to the child’s behavioral, social, and adaptive strengths and weaknesses and is typically performed one on one with a board-certified behavior analyst. Effectiveness should be evaluated on an individual basis.

Consultation with a developmental pediatrician may be helpful in guiding parents through appropriate behavioral management strategies or providing prescription medications (e.g., to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder) when necessary.

Concerns about serious aggressive or destructive behavior can be addressed by a pediatric psychiatrist.

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

Regular dietary evaluation in infancy to ensure optimal nutritional status

Monitoring of developmental progress and educational needs

Behavioral assessment for attention, aggression, and/or social communication difficulties

Monitoring for spine deformities beginning in early childhood

Regular evaluation of teeth; frequency determined by a dentist based on dental condition

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.