http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/trma

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia syndrome (TRMA), the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed: Peripheral blood count and bone marrow analysis for evidence of megaloblastic anemia Serum folate concentration, serum vitamin B12 concentration, and serum iron studies to exclude other entities Hearing test Fasting serum glucose concentration, oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), and urinalysis to diagnose diabetes mellitus Ophthalmologic evaluation Cardiac evaluation, including echocardiography Neuroimaging including brain MRI when clinically indicated Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Thiamine

 Management focuses on lifelong use of pharmacologic doses (50-100 mg/day) of oral thiamine (vitamin B1) in affected individuals regardless of age. High-dose thiamine supplementation: Invariably improves the hematologic picture; Did not prevent the development of hearing loss in infants with TRMA in some studies [Borgna-Pignatti et al 2009, Akın et al 2011]. The efficacy of high-dose thiamine in improving hearing or delaying hearing loss has been difficult to study and remains unclear. May delay onset of diabetes mellitus, and may ameliorate diabetes mellitus in the short term and perhaps even for decades [Valerio et al 1998]. Insulin requirements are reduced with thiamine therapy in some cases [Neufeld et al 1997]. Has not been evaluated as a treatment for optic atrophy, cardiovascular abnormalities, or neurologic abnormalities associated with TRMA.

Additional Treatment

 Red blood cell transfusion for severe anemia is indicated. See Deafness and Hereditary Hearing Loss Overview for treatment strategies for hearing loss. Treatment has included cochlear implant [Hagr 2014]. Diabetes, cardiovascular abnormalities, and neurologic disorders should be treated in the standard manner.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 See Treatment of Manifestations.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Complications secondary to poor glycemic control for diabetes or chronic anemia may occur. Ongoing management of the primary disease is essential.

Surveillance

 The following are recommended at least yearly to monitor the efficacy of the oral thiamine therapy as well as disease progression: Hematologic tests (CBC, reticulocyte count) Hearing test Assessment for glucose intolerance (fasting serum glucose concentration, OGTT, urinalysis) Ophthalmologic evaluation Cardiac evaluation Neurologic evaluation

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of sibs of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the SLC19A2 pathogenic variants in the family in order to identify those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Supplementation with pharmacologic doses of thiamine (vitamin B1) (25-75 mg/day compared to US RDA of 1.5 mg/day) is recommended as early as possible for at-risk sibs until their genetic status can be determined. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 While there are no published studies evaluating pregnancy outcome in affected women, good diabetic control prior to and during pregnancy is recommended.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.