http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/tubb4a-leuk

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a TUBB4A-related leukodystrophy, the following evaluations are recommended [Van Haren et al 2015]: Evaluation by a pediatric neurologist for evidence of developmental delay, spasticity, and extrapyramidal movement disorders Assessment of developmental milestones and cognitive function Assessment of functional disability and equipment needs by a physiotherapist Assessment of speech (communication) and feeding (swallowing) Audiologic assessment Orthopedic evaluation for evidence of scoliosis and/or joint deformity, particularly in individuals with significant dystonia Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Although there is no curative treatment for TUBB4A-related leukodystrophies, quality of life can be improved in the following ways. Spasticity that is functionally disabling can lead to joint contractures and scoliosis; both require physical therapy (stretching and positioning) and medical management. Oral GABA agonists such as baclofen and diazepam can be used. In some instances intrathecal baclofen pumps can be considered. For focal spasticity, intramuscular botulinum toxin may be helpful. Dystonia can be managed with: Baclofen or intramuscular botulinum toxin when associated with spasticity; Trihexyphenidyl or tetrabenazine; High doses of levodopa and carbidopa [Wakusawa et al 2006, Tonduti et al 2016]. When dystonia is refractory to medical management, a baclofen pump may be considered. Of note, to date deep brain stimulation has not been studied in TUBB4A-related leukodystrophy. Swallowing dysfunction may result in use of a gastrostomy for feeding to reduce the risk of aspiration. Dysarthria may warrant augmentative communication tools. Anticonvulsant medications should be used when seizures are present. Constipation, commonly due to neurologic dysfunction and poor intestinal motility, can be treated with diet, laxatives, and stool softeners. Gastroesophageal reflux disease is common and should be considered in the evaluation of pain. Functional ability can be improved by use of walkers or wheeled mobility devices and other necessary equipment. Accommodations in school such as an individual educational plan are often needed. With such accommodations many children with the classic H-ABC phenotype perform at or near grade level for many years, although cognitive decline may be seen later. Family support and advocacy groups can provide needed psychosocial support for affected individuals.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 The following recommendations – based on consensus – have been developed for all leukodystrophies [Van Haren et al 2015]. Calcium and vitamin D supplementation as required to prevent osteoporosis Skin care and frequent repositioning to help prevent pressure sores in individuals with decreased mobility Annual flu vaccination Fall prevention strategies, adaptive equipment (e.g., wheelchairs and walkers), and physical therapy (to increase strength) to help prevent secondary injury

Surveillance

 The following are appropriate: Routine evaluations of swallowing and feeding to reduce the risk of aspiration, and nutrition to prevent malnutrition At least yearly: Medical evaluation including physical examination to assess weight and medications Evaluations by specialists in occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech therapy, and rehabilitation medicine Evaluation by orthopedists to assess for scoliosis and joint dislocation Annual neurologic evaluation to assess symptoms and any emerging complications

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.