

Management

 Consensus clinical management and surveillance recommendations for individuals with TSC have been published [Krueger et al 2013a] (full text).

Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), the following evaluations are recommended by the International Tuberous Sclerosis Consensus Conference [Northrup et al 2013] (full text): Medical history and physical examination, especially for features of TSC, including: Detailed dermatologic inspection/exam Detailed clinical dental inspection/exam Screening for hypertension by obtaining an accurate blood pressure measurement Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, if not completed already, to assess for the presence of tubers, subependymal nodules (SENs), migrational defects, and subependymal giant cell astrocytoma Baseline routine electroencephalogram (EEG) If abnormal, especially if features of TSC-associated neuropsychiatric disorder (TAND) are also present, follow up with a 24-hour video EEG to assess for subclinical seizure activity During infancy, educate parents to recognize infantile spasms, even if none have occurred at the time of first diagnosis. Evaluation for TSC-associated neuropsychiatric disorder (TAND) Complete ophthalmologic evaluation, including dilated funduscopy, to assess for retinal lesions and visual field defects Echocardiogram in the pediatric age group (especially if age <3 years), if one has not been performed already Electrocardiogram (ECG) in all ages to assess for underlying conduction defects Baseline pulmonary function testing (pulmonary function testing and 6-minute walk test) and high-resolution chest computed tomography (HRCT), even if asymptomatic, in individuals at risk of developing LAM (typically females age ≥18 years). Adult males, if symptomatic, should also undergo pulmonary function testing. MRI of abdomen to assess for presence of angiomyolipoma and renal cysts Evaluation of renal function by obtaining a serum creatinine level to determine the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Subependymal giant cell astrocytomas (SEGAs). Early identification of an enlarging giant cell astrocytoma permits medical therapy with mTOR inhibitors [Franz et al 2006, Krueger et al 2010], which may obviate the need for neurosurgical intervention in many individuals. However, neurosurgery may still be indicated when the size of the SEGA causes life-threatening neurologic symptoms. Seizures. Early control of seizures is thought to prevent subsequent epileptic encephalopathy and reduce cognitive behavioral consequences [Muzykewicz et al 2009a, Bombardieri et al 2010]. The efficacy of different treatments for infantile spasms varies among individuals. Despite earlier studies suggesting the contrary, a retrospective review found that vigabatrin controlled infantile spasms in 73% of children with TSC [Camposano et al 2008] (see Prevention of Secondary Complications). The seizures in TSC may be resistant to polydrug therapy with anticonvulsants. A number of small studies have reported excellent results after epilepsy surgery [Avellino et al 1997, Baumgartner et al 1997, Weiner et al 1998, Romanelli et al 2002, Thiele 2004]. Jarrar et al [2004] found that unifocal-onset seizures and mild to no developmental delay at the time of surgery predict excellent long-term outcome. Romanelli et al [2004] discussed the use of electroencephalographic techniques, functional neuroimaging, and invasive cortical mapping to aid the surgeon in evaluating options for surgical resection in individuals with TSC who have multifocal epileptogenic zones. Kagawa et al [2005] found that increased radiolabeled alpha-methyl-L-tryptophan uptake on PET scans identifies epileptogenic tubers with 83% accuracy, thus enhancing successful epilepsy surgery. Weiner et al [2006] used a three-staged bilateral surgical approach in 22 persons with TSC. They suggest that this approach can help identify both primary and secondary epileptogenic zones in young persons with multiple tubers. Case reports and clinical trials assessing the efficacy of mTOR inhibitors for the treatment of intractable epilepsy in individuals with TSC have been published with encouraging results [Muncy et al 2009, Krueger et al 2013b]; additional trials are underway to confirm these preliminary findings. 
            Renal angiomyolipoma For asymptomatic, growing angiomyolipoma measuring >4 cm in diameter or >3 cm and growing rapidly, treatment with an mTOR inhibitor is currently recommended as the most effective first-line therapy in the short term [Davies et al 2011, Bissler et al 2013]. The demonstrated tolerability to date is far preferable to the renal damage caused by angiomyolipoma progression or surgical and embolitic/ablative therapies, though studies are still needed to confirm long-term benefits and safety [Krueger et al 2013b]. Selective embolization followed by corticosteroids, kidney-sparing resection, or ablative therapy for exophytic lesions are acceptable second-line therapy for asymptomatic angiomyolipomas [Bissler et al 2002]. For acute hemorrhage, embolization followed by corticosteroids is more appropriate [Mourikis et al 1999]. Nephrectomy is to be avoided because of the high incidence of complications and increased risk for future renal insufficiency and end-stage renal failure, and the poor prognosis that results from chronic kidney disease. Facial angiofibromas. Topical mTOR inhibitor formuations have been shown to be efficacious in the treatment of facial angiofibromas. Cardiac rhabdomyomas. Previous standard of care for the treatment of newborns with cardiac rhabdomyomas resulting in life-threatening complications (i.e., outflow tract obstruction) was surgery. There have now been several reports of off-label use of mTOR inhibitors to treat cardiac rhabdomyomas in infants with TSC with encouraging results [Tiberio et al 2011, Dogan et al 2015, Goyer et al 2015, Mlczoch et al 2015]. These reports indicate that mTOR inhibitors may be a better alternative than surgery for clinically significant cardiac rhabdomyomas. LAM affects almost exclusively women of childbearing age in whom estrogen is suspected to be involved in stimulating growth of smooth muscle cells in the lung. Medroxy-progesterone treatment and/or oophorectomy reduce the production of estrogen; however, response to treatment is highly individual. Oxygen therapy is necessary with impaired lung function. Persons with severe disease require lung transplantation. Other trials have demonstrated efficacy of mTOR inhibitors for renal angiomyolipomas and LAM [Bissler et al 2008, McCormack et al 2011]. The FDA approved use of mTOR inhibitors for treatment of the lung issues in people with TSC (May 28, 2015).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 For those on vigabatrin therapy, visual field testing at the onset of therapy, at three-month intervals for the first 18 months, and every six months afterward is recommended because of the risk for peripheral visual field restriction [Willmore et al 2009].

Surveillance

 The following routine monitoring is recommended for individuals with TSC (adapted from Krueger et al [2013a], Table 3): 
                Central nervous system Obtain MRI of brain every one to three years in asymptomatic (no symptoms referable to the central nervous system) individuals with TSC younger than age 25 years to monitor for new occurrence of subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA). Those with asymptomatic SEGA in childhood should continue to be imaged periodically as adults to ensure that there is no growth. In affected individuals with large or growing SEGA causing ventricular enlargement who are still asymptomatic, brain MRI scans should be performed more frequently and these individuals and their families should be educated regarding the potential for new symptoms. Perform screening for TAND features at least annually. Perform comprehensive formal evaluation for TAND at key developmental points: infancy (0-3 years), preschool (3-6 years), pre-middle school (6-9 years), adolescence (12-16 years), early adulthood (18-25 years), and as needed thereafter. Obtain routine EEG in individuals with known or suspected seizure activity. The frequency of routine EEG should be determined by clinical need. 
                Renal Obtain MRI of the abdomen to assess for progression of angiomyolipomas and renal cystic disease every one to three years throughout the lifetime of the affected individual. Assess renal function (including determination of GFR) and blood pressure at least annually. Cardiac. In asymptomatic infants and children with documented cardiac rhabdomyomas, obtain an echocardiogram every one to three years until regression of the cardiac rhabdomyomas is documented. More frequent or advanced diagnostic assessment may be required for symptomatic individuals. 
                Pulmonary Perform clinical screening (targeted history) for LAM symptoms, including exertional dyspnea and shortness of breath, at each clinic visit for women older than age 18 years or those who report respiratory symptoms. Counseling regarding smoking risk and estrogen use should be reviewed at each clinic visit for individuals at risk for LAM. Obtain a high-resolution computed tomography (HCRT) of the lungs every five to ten years in asymptomatic individuals at risk for LAM who have no evidence of lung cysts on baseline HRCT. Individuals with lung cysts detected on HRCT should have annual pulmonary function testing (pulmonary function test and 6-min walk) and HRCT reduced to every two to three years. Skin. Perform detailed clinical dermatologic inspection/exam annually. Dental. Perform detailed clinical dental inspection/exam at minimum every six months and panoramic radiographs by age seven years, if not performed previously. Ophthalmologic. Perform annual ophthalmologic evaluation in affected individuals with previously identified ophthalmologic lesions or vision symptoms at the baseline evaluation.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following Smoking Estrogen use in adolescent and adult females Nephrectomy (see Treatment of Manifestations, Renal angiomyolipoma)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known; If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, physical examination and imaging studies (skin examination, retinal examination, brain imaging, and renal ultrasound examination) to assess for the clinical features of TSC (see Diagnosis). See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Many clinical trials are assessing the effect of drug therapy on the manifestations of TSC (see ClinicalTrials.gov). Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.