http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/unc80-def

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with UNC80 deficiency, the evaluations and referrals summarized in Table 4 (if not performed as part of the evaluation that led to diagnosis) are recommended.


Table 4. 

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis




Organ System
Evaluation
Comment





Constitutional

Growth assessment incl height, weight, & head circumference




Eyes

Ophthalmologic eval




Gastrointestinal

Feeding eval




Musculoskeletal

Orthopedic eval
If club feet and/or scoliosis is present



Neurologic

EEG
If neurologic history suggests presence of seizures



Psychiatric

Psychiatric eval
If behavioral problems are present



Miscellaneous / Other

Psychoeducational and/or developmental evals (physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy evals) to assess developmental delays & facilitate appropriate interventions



Consultation w/clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Recommended Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

Treatment of Manifestations




Table 5. 

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with UNC80 Deficiency




Manifestation
Treatment




Ocular abnormalities (nystagmus/strabismus)
Ophthalmologic management


Oral feeding difficulties
G-tube feeding


Constipation
Standard management


Orthopedic abnormalities (club feet, scoliosis, joint contractures)
Braces and/or corrective surgery


Seizures
Antiepileptic drugs


Self-injurious behavior
Behavior modification therapy


Hypo/hypertonia, gross motor delays, sensory processing difficulties
Physical therapy, occupational therapy


Absent speech
Sign language instruction; consider alternate forms of communication

Treatment of Manifestations in Individuals with UNC80 Deficiency

Global Developmental Disability / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states. Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed. 
Ages 5-21 years In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21. Discussion about transition plans and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood. All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider: Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs may be considered. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician. In the United States: Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) enrollment is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities. Families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction


Gross motor dysfunction Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility. Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, lifts, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers). Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function such as feeding, grooming, dressing, and writing. Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy – typically from an occupational or speech therapist – is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control. Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.

Surveillance

Annual evaluation with the following specialists is appropriate: Pediatrician for growth assessment Neurologist to identify and manage seizures Orthopedist for evaluation of contractures and back examination for scoliosis Ophthalmologist for ocular manifestations and corrective therapy if needed

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.