

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Usher syndrome type II (USH2), the following evaluations are recommended: Audiology. Otoscopy, puretone audiometry, assessment of speech perception, and, in some individuals, auditory brain stem response (ABR) and distortion product otoacoustic emission (DPOAE) Vestibular function. Rotary chair, calorics, electronystagmography, and computerized posturography Ophthalmology. Funduscopy, visual acuity, visual field (Goldmann perimetry), electroretinography (ERG) Other. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Hearing. Hearing aids are helpful. Young children can benefit from early fitting of hearing aids and speech training to normalize language. Environmental trauma (e.g., noise) or a genetic susceptibility (e.g., presbycusis) in addition to the congenital, stable deficit of USH2 may combine to produce severe-to-profound hearing loss in older individuals with USH2; in such individuals, cochlear implantation may be warranted. Vision. See Retinitis Pigmentosa Overview, Management. Tunnel vision and night blindness can increase the likelihood of accidental injury.

Surveillance

 Routine auditory evaluation is recommended in order to detect changes that may require modifications to hearing aids. Routine ophthalmologic evaluation is recommended in order to detect potentially treatable complications such as cataracts.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Competition in various sports requiring a full range of vision may be difficult and possibly dangerous. Progressive loss of peripheral vision impairs the ability to safely drive a car.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate all sibs at risk for Usher syndrome type II as soon after birth as possible to allow early support and management of the child and the family. Evaluations include: Audiology. ABR, DPOAE Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known See Genetic Counseling for issues related to evaluation of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 High-dose vitamin A supplementation should not be used by affected pregnant women, as large doses of vitamin A (doses above the RDA for pregnant or lactating women) may be teratogenic to the developing fetus (see Other).

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Vitamin A supplements. Although treatment with vitamin A palmitate may limit the progression of RP in some persons, no formal studies have evaluated its effectiveness in Usher syndrome type II. Vitamin A is fat soluble and not excreted in the urine. Therefore, high-dose vitamin A should be used only under the direction of a physician because of the need to monitor for harmful side effects, such as hepatotoxicity. Of note, the studies by Berson et al [1993] were performed on individuals older than age 18 years because of the unknown effects of high-dose vitamin A on children. Lutein supplements. Oral administration of lutein (20 mg/d) for six months had no effect on central vision; however, long-term effects are unknown [Aleman et al 2001].