

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Usher syndrome type I, the following evaluations are recommended: Audiology. Otoscopy, pure tone audiometry, assessment of speech perception, and, in some individuals, auditory brain stem response (ABR) and distortion product otoacoustic emission (DPOAE) Vestibular function. Rotary chair, calorics, electronystagmography, and computerized posturography Ophthalmology. Funduscopy, visual acuity, visual field (Goldmann perimetry), and electroretinography (ERG) Clinical genetics. Consultation with a clincial geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Hearing. Hearing aids are usually ineffectual in individuals with Usher syndrome type I because of the severity of the hearing loss. Cochlear implantation should be seriously considered, especially for young children [Damen et al 2006, Pennings et al 2006, Liu et al 2008]. Communication skills may be optimized if all family members, as well as affected children, receive specialized training from educators of the hearing impaired. Balance. Tunnel vision and night blindness can combine with vestibular areflexia to predispose affected individuals to accidental injury. Well-supervised sports activities may help a person with Usher syndrome type I to compensate by becoming more adept at using the somatosensory component of the balance system. Vision. See Retinitis Pigmentosa Overview, Management. Communication by sign language and lip reading becomes increasingly difficult over time as the retinitis pigmentosa (RP) progresses. Vision loss may progress to the point that the individual with Usher syndrome type I can only communicate through tactile signing.

Surveillance

 Routine ophthalmologic evaluation is recommended to detect potentially treatable complications such as cataracts.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Competition in sports requiring acute vision and/or good balance may be difficult and possibly dangerous. Persons with Usher syndrome type I often become disoriented when submerged in water because they lack the sense of where 'up' is; they should therefore exercise caution while swimming. Progressive loss of peripheral vision impairs the ability to safely drive a car.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate the hearing of all sibs at risk for Usher syndrome type I as soon after birth as possible to allow early diagnosis and treatment of hearing impairment. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known. Auditory brain stem response (ABR) and distortion product otoacoustic emission (DPOAE) if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Hearing aids are usually ineffectual in individuals with Usher syndrome type I because of the severity of the hearing loss. Vitamin A supplements. Although treatment with vitamin A palmitate may limit the progression of RP in persons with isolated RP and Usher syndrome type II, no studies have evaluated the effectiveness of vitamin A palmitate in individuals with Usher syndrome type I. Vitamin A is fat soluble and not excreted in the urine. Therefore, high-dose vitamin A dietary supplements should be used only under the direction of a physician because of the need to monitor for harmful side effects such as hepatotoxicity. Of note, the studies by Berson et al [1993] were performed on individuals older than age 18 years because of the unknown effects of high-dose vitamin A on children. High-dose vitamin A supplementation should not be used by affected pregnant women, as large doses of vitamin A (i.e., above the recommended daily allowance for pregnant or lactating women) may be teratogenic to the developing fetus. Lutein supplements. Oral administration of lutein (20 mg/d) for seven months had no effect on central vision; however, long-term effects are unknown [Aleman et al 2001].