http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/vhl

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Neurologic history and physical examination for evidence of CNS or peripheral nerve hemangioblastomatosis. A baseline brain and spine MRI is considered standard procedure. Ophthalmologic evaluation for retinal hemangioblastomas Abdominal ultrasound examination after age 16 years. Suspicious lesions in the kidney, adrenal gland, or pancreas should be evaluated by more sophisticated techniques, such as CT scan or MRI. Blood pressure determination, supplemented by measurement of urinary catecholamine metabolites after age five years to evaluate for pheochromocytoma Audiologic evaluation for hearing loss associated with endolymphatic sac tumors Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 No guidelines exist for the management of VHL lesions. 
            CNS hemangioblastoma Most central nervous system hemangioblastomas can be surgically removed completely and safely [Lonser et al 2003]. Some advocate early surgical removal of both symptomatic and asymptomatic CNS lesions, while others follow asymptomatic lesions with yearly imaging studies. Surgical intervention of cysts/syrinx in the spinal cord is recommended. Preoperative arterial embolization may be indicated, especially for extensive spinal tumors. The position of stereotactic therapy is still questionable [Oldfield 2015]. Gamma knife surgery may be useful with small solid tumors or those in inoperable sites [Asthagiri et al 2010, Simone et al 2011]. While this technique may reduce the size of the solid tumor, it does not appear to prevent cyst formation. In a study with nearly six years of follow up of 40 hemangioblastomas in 20 patients treated with stereotactic therapy, no progression was described in 33% [Asthagiri et al 2010]. Similar results are found when analyzing the natural history of the hemangioblastomas (25%) [Lonser et al 2014]. The unpredictable growth pattern makes it difficult to determine when to start stereotactic therapy, to avoid unnecessary intervention. A recent study demonstrates a local tumor control with stereotactic therapy of 93% after three years, 89% after five years, and 79% after ten years [Kano et al 2015]. Factors associated with tumor control are solid, smaller, VHL-associated lesions and higher margin dose. Thirteen of the 186 (7%) experienced complications, 11 patients needed steroid therapy and one person died of refractory peritumoral edema. Two patients required additional surgery. 
            Retinal hemangioblastoma Most ophthalmologists favor prospective treatment of retinal (but not optic nerve) angiomas to avoid blindness, although spontaneous regression has occurred. Therapeutic modalities used to treat retinal hemangioblastomas include diathermy, xenon, laser, and cryocoagulation, with variable degrees of success depending on the location, size, and number of lesions. Recurrent tumors have been noted, even after many years, but some may be new tumors in the same general area rather than recurrent disease. External beam radiotherapy has been shown to be useful when standard therapy has not prevented progression [Raja et al 2004]. 
            Renal cell carcinoma Early surgery is the best option for renal cell carcinoma, although close monitoring is recommended for lesions smaller than 3 cm. Depending on the size and location of the tumor, nephron-sparing or partial nephrectomy may be possible without compromising survival [Grubb et al 2005]. Nephrectomy should leave the adrenal gland in situ, as is done in individuals with renal cell carcinoma who do not have a confirmed diagnosis of VHL. If contralateral pheochromocytoma occurs, the remaining adrenal gland will prevent or delay steroid replacement therapy. Cryoablation is being increasingly used for small lesions or in individuals who are likely to require multiple surgical procedures [Shingleton & Sewell 2002]. Radio frequency ablation therapy is often applied to smaller tumors, particularly <3 cm [Best et al 2012]. However, smaller lesions treated with radio frequency ablation need frequent intervention [Joly et al 2011]. The major complication rate (need for a radiologic, surgical, or endoscopic intervention) for laparoscopic and percutaneous radio frequency ablation therapy was 7.3% and 4.3%, respectively [Young et al 2012]. Renal transplantation has been successful in individuals in whom bilateral nephrectomy has been necessary. It is imperative to evaluate any living related potential donor for VHL syndrome and to exclude those found to have VHL syndrome. 
            Pheochromocytomas Pheochromocytomas should be surgically removed. Laparoscopic approaches have been shown to be effective. Preoperative treatment with alpha-adrenergic blockade, and optional additional beta-adrenergic blockade for seven to ten days is appropriate even in individuals with no known hypertension. Partial adrenalectomy could be considered. One long-term follow-up study (9.25 years) of 36 affected individuals showed no metastatic disease; ipsilateral recurrence after partial adrenalectomy was seen in three individuals (11%) [Benhammou et al 2010]. Partial adrenalectomy is also therapy of choice in children. In 10 VHL patients 18 successful operations were performed. After follow up (median 7.2 years), 2 patients developed a new tumor in the ipsilateral adrenal gland [Volkin et al 2012]. 
            Pancreatic cysts and neuroendocrine tumors Pancreatic cysts are common, but rarely influence endocrine function and generally do not require surgical removal. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors need to be differentiated from cysts and serous cystadenomas. Pancreatic tumors are usually slow growing and are not hormonally active, although they can cause metastatic disease. Surgery should be considered when there is a high risk of metastases suggested by one of the following prognostic criteria [Blansfield et al 2007]: A tumor of ≥3 cm A pathogenic variant in exon 3 A tumor with a doubling rate <500 days Endolymphatic sac tumors (ELST). Consideration of surgical removal of these slow-growing tumors must include discussion of the possible complication of total deafness. Early intervention with small tumors has been shown to preserve both hearing and vestibular function [Kim et al 2005, Friedman et al 2013]. Friedman et al described two patients (2/18) with postoperative decreased facial nerve function and three (3/18) patients with recurrent ELSTs (with a mean follow up of 67 months). Kim et al [2013] studied 31 patients with VHL with 33 resected ELSTs. Twenty-nine patients were symptomatic. After surgery, hearing was stabilized or improved in 97% of individuals, and tumor resection was complete in 91%. Complications occurred in three tumors: cerebrospinal fluid leakage in two (6%) and transient lower cranial nerve palsy in one (3%). Epididymal or broad ligament papillary cyst adenomas. These generally do not require surgery, unless they are symptomatic or are threatening fertility.

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations

 Early detection through surveillance and removal of tumors may prevent or minimize deficits such as hearing loss, vision loss, neurologic symptoms, and the need for renal replacement therapy.

Surveillance

 Individuals with known VHL syndrome, individuals without clinical manifestations but identified as having a VHL pathogenic variant, and first-degree relatives who have not undergone DNA-based testing need regular clinical monitoring by a physician or medical team familiar with the spectrum of VHL syndrome. Annual evaluation starting at age one year for neurologic symptoms, vision problems or hearing disturbance Annual examination starting at age one year for signs of nystagmus, strabismus, or white pupils Annual blood pressure monitoring starting at age one year Monitoring for complications is as follows: CNS lesions. MRI of the brain and total spine every two years starting at age 16 years. Attention should be given to the inner ear/petrous temporal bone (for ELST) and the posterior fossa. Visceral lesions. Annual abdominal ultrasound; MRI scan of the abdomen (kidney, pancreas and adrenal glands) every two years starting at age 16 years Retinal angiomas. Annual ophthalmology evaluation with indirect ophthalmoscope starting at age one year Pheochromocytoma. Annual blood or urinary fractionated metanephrines starting at age five years Endolymphatic sac tumors (ELST). The best way to detect ELST is unknown. ELST presents as a mass on the posterior wall of the petrous part of the temporal bone and can be missed on standard MRI. MRI with contrast and high signal intensity with T1 (to detect hydrops), using thin slices of the internal auditory canal is recommended in symptomatic individuals. Butman et al [2013] found that FLAIR MRI is useful to find ELST-associated hydrops. Butman et al [2013] described three pathophysiologic ways in which ELST can cause symptoms: optic capsule invasion, hemorrhage, and endolymphatic hydrops. Symptoms can be caused by all three mechanisms and hemorrhage or hydrops can be present even without any lesion being visible on MRI (<3 mm). Audiology assessment every two to three years (annually if hearing loss, tinnitus, or vertigo is present) starting at age five years. Audiology can be used to detect (early) hearing loss. Binderup et al [2013b] described a male patient with demonstrable hearing loss by audiometric data whose ELST was only detectable with MRI more than one year later, after the patient already suffered from complete right-sided hearing loss. Results from a large study on audiometric data in individuals with VHL are pending. While current medical surveillance guidelines do not address structured psychological support for individuals with VHL, their partners, and their family members, research suggests a distinct need for psychosocial support [Lammens et al 2010, Lammens et al 2011b]. Note: The surveillance guidelines established for VHL are not evidence based and rely on experiential reporting, largely from North America. Guidelines may vary somewhat depending on the local standard of care. In the United States, the VHL Alliance has worked extensively with healthcare professionals to assemble guidelines which are generally accepted throughout the world [VHL Handbook]. Other guidelines originate from Denmark and the Netherlands. For example, Dutch guidelines recommend screening for ELST only on indication. In addition, examination by a primary care physician and assessment of metanephrine levels start at age ten years, while ophthalmologic examination begins at age five years. Two recent studies evaluated tumor progression. In one study, new tumor development was compared to age and genotype [Binderup et al 2013b]. According to their results, surveillance for retinal angiomas is essential during teenage years and central nervous system hemangioblastomas is mainly important in adults. In the other study, the optimal lesion-specific age to start surveillance and the optimal screening interval per organ system was analyzed [Kruizinga et al 2013]. The optimal time to start metanephrine measurements is age five years; retinal screening in patients with VHL can start at age 12 years. For central nervous system hemangioblastomas and visceral lesions, starting age was in line with current surveillance guidelines. Furthermore, to attain a 5% detection rate, surveillance intervals for retinal tumors can be twice as long, and for the adrenal gland, four times as long. Improved surveillance guidelines have increased the life expectancy of individuals with VHL by more than 16 years since 1990 [Wilding et al 2012]. Two studies evaluated the implementation of national surveillance guidelines in Denmark and the Netherlands. One study showed that more than 90% of the 84 affected individuals included reported that they were familiar with their national VHL surveillance guidelines. However, daily practice showed that 64% of those individuals had received information that was only partially consistent with the Dutch guidelines [Lammens et al 2011a]. In a Danish study, compliance and frequency of follow up was surprisingly low with regard to the national VHL guidelines for individuals with VHL and subjects at risk [Bertelsen & Kosteljanetz 2011]. These studies collectively suggest that correct implementation of surveillance guidelines through a doctor- and patient-oriented information campaign could have an immediate positive impact for individuals with VHL.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Tobacco products should be avoided since they are considered a risk factor for kidney cancer. Chemicals and industrial toxins known to affect VHL involved organs should be avoided. Contact sports should be avoided if adrenal or pancreatic lesions are present.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Early recognition of manifestations of VHL syndrome may allow for timely intervention and improved outcome; thus, clinical surveillance of asymptomatic at-risk individuals (including children) for early manifestations of VHL syndrome is appropriate. The American Society of Clinical Oncology identifies VHL syndrome as a Group 1 disorder – a hereditary disease for which genetic testing is considered part of the standard management for at-risk family members [Robson et al 2010] (full text). If the VHL pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used for early identification of at-risk family members to improve diagnostic certainty and reduce the need for screening procedures in those at-risk family members who have not inherited the pathogenic variant [Priesemann et al 2006]. If the VHL pathogenic variant in the family is not known and/or at-risk individuals decline genetic testing for religious or financial reasons, continued screening for VHL lesions is warranted (see Surveillance). The use of molecular genetic testing for determining the genetic status of presumably at-risk relatives when a family member with a clinical diagnosis of VHL syndrome is not available for testing is not straightforward. Such test results need to be interpreted with caution. A positive test result signals the presence of a VHL pathogenic variant in the at-risk family member and indicates that the same molecular genetic testing method can be used to assess the genetic status of other at-risk family members. However, a negative test for a VHL pathogenic variant under such circumstances suggests one of the following possibilities: The at-risk family member has not inherited a VHL pathogenic variant. The familial VHL pathogenic variant may not be detectable by the assays used. The clinical diagnosis of VHL syndrome in the affected family member is questionable. In this situation, the presumably at-risk family member has a small, but finite, residual risk of having inherited a pathogenic allele (i.e., VHL syndrome or other hereditary disorder). In counseling such individuals, careful consideration should be given to the strength of the clinical diagnosis of VHL syndrome in the affected family member, the relationship of the at-risk individual to the affected family member, the perceived risk of an undetected VHL (or other gene) pathogenic variant, and the potential need for some form of continued clinical surveillance. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Recommended medical surveillance for pregnant women with VHL is still debated. Research by the French VHL Study Group showed a significantly higher complication rate of hemangioblastomas in individuals with VHL who had had at least one pregnancy [Abadie et al 2010]. Another study concluded that pregnancy has a significant influence on cerebellar hemangioblastoma growth and causes an overall high complication rate (17%) [Frantzen et al 2012]. Intensified surveillance could therefore be recommended in a specialized medical center during preconception care and pregnancy. Special attention should be paid to pheochromocytoma and cerebellar hemangioblastoma. In another study pregnancy was not related with the development of new hemangioblastomas or hemangioblastoma/cyst growth [Ye et al 2012]. Their data suggest no extra precautions need to be taken during gestation. The VHL Handbook recommends MRI of the cerebellum without contrast at four months’ gestation.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Certain VHL pathogenic variants fail to downregulate HIFα, leading to overexpression of downstream effectors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) which contribute to pathogenesis. Many experimental therapies target these misregulated signaling pathways. An intravitreal VEGF receptor inhibitor, ranibizumab, has been used with some success in individuals with retinal hemangioblastomas who have either failed local therapy or whose lesions are not amenable to local therapy [Wong et al 2008]. Intravitreal injections of bevacizumab, another VEGF inhibitor, have also been shown to be effective in treating retinal hemangioblastomas in patients with VHL [Hrisomalos et al 2010]. Stabilization of some (but not all) CNS hemangioblastomas has also been demonstrated [Madhusudan et al 2004]. A tyrosine kinase inhibitor that inhibits the action of growth factor receptors, sunitinib, has had some utility in the rare unresectable malignant pheochromocytomas, but simple surgical excision is clearly preferable for these usually benign tumors [Jimenez et al 2009]. Sunitinib has also been shown to effectively treat clear cell renal cell carcinomas – but not hemangioblastomas – in patients with VHL [Jonasch et al 2011]. Checkpoint inhibitors such as antibodies targeting PD-L1 have shown promise in managing tumor load; however, these treatments have unknown toxicity in patients with VHL, who will likely have dozens to thousands of small subclinical lesions present throughout their body. . Sardi et al [2009] reported three-year stabilization of previously progressive multifocal spinal hemangioblastomas with thalidomide. Gene replacement therapy and other curative treatment approaches are still in the early developmental phases. No such treatment for VHL currently exists, although it will be exciting to follow the example set by other monogenic diseases causing blindness. Encouragingly, gene replacement therapy strategies have been used successfully for other diseases of the eye including Leber congenital amaurosis, retinitis pigmentosa, and Usher syndrome [Ashtari et al 2011, Trapani et al 2014, Deng et al 2015]. The medical and research communities are largely focused on ameliorating disease progression and on improvement of early detection methodology. Surgical techniques are rapidly improving and therapeutic options are broadening every year. Premature termination codon 124 (PTC124), also known as ataluren, may benefit a subset of affected individuals in whom nonsense variants give rise to premature stop codons in the messenger RNA (mRNA) [Auld et al 2010]. There are three stop codons: UAA, UAG, and UGA. PTC124 promotes read-through of all three stop codons with different efficiencies. The highest read-through efficiency takes place at UGA, followed by UAG and then UAA. PTC124 has been successfully proven to promote read-through of nonsense variants in Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), cystic fibrosis (CF), and Usher syndrome type 1C. Phase 1 and 2 clinical trials have shown no serious side-effects with PTC124 treatment, even after long-term use [Wilschanski et al 2011]. Preclinical investigation of PTC124 effects on VHL is ongoing. Aminoglycosides such as gentamicin promote read-through of premature stop codons when they are supplied in high concentrations, but they have serious side effects. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.