

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with VLCAD deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended: Measurement of baseline plasma (serum) creatine kinase (CK) concentration Measurement of baseline liver transaminases Cardiac echocardiography Electrocardiogram Clinical genetics consultation Note: In the setting of acute disease, measurement of blood glucose concentration and blood ammonia concentration may be indicated.

Treatment of Manifestations

 Frequently updated, succinct “emergency” care plans should detail the typical clinical issues (either those already experienced by the patient or those anticipated based on the diagnosis) and the importance of early management (e.g., use of IV glucose as an energy source, monitoring for cardiac rhythm disturbance, and monitoring of rhabdomyolysis), and avoidance of triggers (fasting, long-chain fats, and irritation of the myocardium) [Arnold et al 2009]. Cardiac dysfunction is reversible with early, intensive supportive care (occasionally including extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation) and diet modification. See Prevention of Primary Manifestations.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Individuals with the more severe forms are typically placed on a low-fat formula, with supplemental calories provided through medium-chain triglycerides (MCT). A variety of strategies for the low-fat diet are used, ranging from 13%-39% of calories as total fat, with an additional 15%-18% of calories supplied as MCT oil in those most strictly restricted for long-chain fats [Solis & Singh 2002]. Extra MCT has demonstrated benefit in older individuals with long-chain defects who have exercise intolerance. Gillingham et al [2006] demonstrated improved exercise tolerance in individuals given 0.5 g/kg lean body weight 20 minutes prior to exercise. [Behrend et al 2012]. Triheptanoin has been used in a few individuals with the goal of providing calories as well as providing anaplerotic carbons; however, the efficacy remains controversial. Formal clinical trials of triheptanoin are in progress (see Therapies Under Investigation). Severe exercise (e.g., military training) has unmasked symptoms in previously asymptomatic adults [Hoffman et al 2006, Laforêt et al 2009], emphasizing that exercise should be guided by the individual’s tolerance level. The use of carnitine supplementation is controversial [Arnold et al 2009]: consensus as to whether additional carnitine is detrimental or efficacious has not been established.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Acute rhabdomyolysis is treated with ample hydration and alkalization of the urine to protect renal function and to prevent acute renal failure secondary to myoglobinuria.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Avoid the following: Fasting, including periods of preparation and recovery from planned surgery or sedation [Vellekoop et al 2011] Myocardial irritation (e.g., cardiac catheterization) Dehydration (risk for acute tubular necrosis) High-fat diet (long-chain fats) including ketogenic or carbohydrate-restricted diets for the purpose of weight loss. Careful weight reduction has been accomplished by restricting long-chain fats and calories, supplementing with calories provided through medium-chain triglycerides (MCT), and limiting overnight catabolism with uncooked cornstarch [Zweers et al 2012] Volatile anesthetics and those that contain high doses of long-chain fatty acids such as propofol and etomidate [Vellekoop et al 2011]. However, the use of propofol for short duration procedures has been evaluated in individuals with LCHAD deficiency and not found to cause adverse events [Martin et al 2014].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from institution of treatment and preventive measures. If the pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, plasma or dried blood spot acylcarnitine analysis may not be sufficiently sensitive, and direct VLCAD assay of lymphocytes or FAO probe studies of cultured fibroblasts may be required. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 During pregnancy, placental and fetal β-oxidation may temporize or even improve maternal fatty acid β-oxidation [Mendez-Figueroa et al 2010]. However, labor and post-partum periods are catabolic states and place the mother at higher risk for rhabdomyolysis and subsequent myoglobinuria. A management plan for labor and delivery has been proposed by Mendez-Figueroa et al [2010].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Triheptanoin is a source of 7-carbon fatty acids which may be superior to medium-chain triglycerides, in that they provide a 3-carbon chain to promote anaplerosis [Roe et al 2002]. Bezafibrate, a PPAR pan agonist, has been shown to increase VLCAD enzyme activity in vitro in fibroblasts cultured from individuals with ACADVL pathogenic missense variants [Djouadi et al 2005, Gobin-Limballe et al 2007]. It is not known whether this observation translates into reduction of clinical morbidity, and a small study published by Orngreen et al [2014] suggests that exercise tolerance does not improve in response to oral bezafibrate. Dantrolene sodium, a muscle relaxant, may be useful as an adjunctive therapy in adult-onset rhabdomyolysis [Voermans et al 2005]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.