http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/vmcm

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with multiple cutaneous and mucosal venous malformations (VMCM), the following evaluations are recommended: In an individual diagnosed with multiple cutaneous and mucosal venous malformations (VMCM), MRI of the affected area to evaluate extension into underlying tissue [Dompmartin et al 2010, Boon et al 2011, Boon & Vikkula 2012] Medical genetics consultation Biopsy is usually not necessary for diagnosis

Treatment of Manifestations

Management depends largely on the size and location of the lesions. Treatment is required for any symptomatic VMCM lesion. Although sclerotherapy is the treatment of choice, sclerosing agents are not specific and can lead to ulceration if the VMCM is mucosal or involves the epidermis [Hammer et al 2001, Dompmartin et al 2010, Boon et al 2011]. Foam aethoxysclerol and bleomycin are preferentially used as sclerosing agents. Surgery gives a consistently better result if it is performed after sclerotherapy. If lesions are painful and D-dimers are elevated, low molecular-weight heparin can be used to alleviate pain [Dompmartin et al 2008].

Prevention of Secondary Complications

If VMCM is associated with localized intravascular coagulopathy (LIC) (D-dimer level greater than twice the normal range), treatment with low molecular-weight heparin should be initiated before any surgery in order to avoid perioperative decompensation of LIC into disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC).

Surveillance

Because VMCM lesions can increase in size over time and become painful or symptomatic, affected individuals should be reevaluated yearly or whenever symptoms arise.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Contraceptive pills with high estrogen levels should be avoided, as venous malformation lesions are estrogen dependent. Venous malformations can increase in size and become symptomatic, especially at initiation of estrogen-based contraception. (In some, but not all, instances, stabilization of a venous malformation lesion and diminution of pain may be observed after three months of contraceptive pill use.)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Evaluating at-risk neonates by physical examination is appropriate in order to identify those who may benefit from early treatment. Lesions arising after infancy usually stay small and therefore are rarely symptomatic. If no lesions are seen at birth, a second evaluation should be done around puberty. If the TEK pathogenic variant has been identified in the family, molecular genetic testing can be used to evaluate at-risk relatives. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 

During pregnancy, affected women may develop small new lesions; in addition, existing lesions may increase in size and become painful. If the D-dimer level is high, low molecular-weight heparin therapy may be used to alleviate pain.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.