http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/vodi

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency (VODI), the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment of immune function including serum immunoglobulin levels, T- and B-cell numbers and percentages, and T-cell proliferative response to mitogens More extensive immune testing for number of memory B and T cells and intracellular cytokine (IL2, IL4, IL6, and IFNγ) responses to stimulation, if available Complete blood count Assessment of hepatic function (including serum concentrations of aminotransferases, bilirubin, and albumin) and assessment for sequelae of portal hypertension (including anemia and thrombocytopenia) Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor A clotting profile and a hepatic Doppler ultrasound examination should be undertaken prior to consideration of hepatic biopsy for a histologic diagnosis of hepatic veno-occlusive disease (hVOD). Evidence of impaired clotting and/or portal hypertension contraindicates hepatic biopsy.

Treatment of Manifestations

Hypogammaglobulinemia is treated via intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), which should commence at the diagnosis of VODI or in presymptomatic sibs confirmed to have homozygous SP110 pathogenic variants. An appropriate dose is 0.4 g/kg every four weeks adjusting the dose to maintain a trough IgG level greater than 6 g/L. Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis with cotrimoxazole pediatric suspension (5 mL = trimethoprim 40 mg and sulfamethoxazole 200 mg) should be ongoing in children with VODI who tolerate this medication. This may be administered as a single daily dose or as a single dose three days per week. The recommended dose is 5 mg trimethoprim per kg (0.625 mL/kg) or 150 mg/M2 (3.75 mL/M2). Infections with specific agents should be treated with appropriate supportive care and antibacterials or antivirals. Hepatic transplantation may be considered, but appears to have a high rate of complications in the VODI cohort studied to date (see Other). Bone marrow transplantation.
Ganaiem et al [2013] reported that this may be an efficacious treatment modality with appropriate conditioning therapy (see Other).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Initiation of regular IVIG at the time of diagnosis to prevent infection related to severe hypogammaglobulinemia and cotrimoxazole prophylaxis to prevent Pneumocystis jirovecii infection is appropriate (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Some evidence suggests that treatment of immunodeficiency early in VODI may reduce the risk for development or recurrence of hVOD.

Surveillance

The following are appropriate: Regular surveillance of hepatic function, platelet count, and hemoglobin level in children with VODI as hepatic failure and portal hypertension may occur Surveillance of serum and urine electrolytes as the syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuretic hormone (SIADH) may occur Measurement of immunoglobulin concentrations prior to IVIG infusions Broncho-alveolar lavage to diagnose Pneumocystis jirovecii infection; viral cultures or lung function studies as needed Cerebrospinal imaging to diagnose leukodystrophy when clinically indicated

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Agents known to predispose to hVOD (e.g., cyclophosphamide and senecio alkaloids/bush teas) should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate sibs of a proband who are younger than age 12 months in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. The majority of children with VODI present before age six months; however, as one child presented at age 11 months, testing should be considered in sibs of a proband who are younger than age 12 months. Evaluations include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known; Serum immunoglobulins, full blood count and liver function tests at birth and repeated at six months if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. Penetrance is complete (i.e., 100%) in the individuals with VODI described to date; thus, molecular genetic testing of healthy at-risk sibs of a proband who are older than age 12 months is not recommended. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

For an affected pregnant woman, ongoing intravenous immunoglobulin to prevent infection related to severe hypogammaglobulinemia and cotrimoxazole prophylaxis to prevent Pneumocystis jirovecii infection is appropriate during pregnancy. There is evidence that early treatment of a baby known to be homozygous for pathogenic SP110 pathogenic variants may result in improved long-term outcomes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Hepatic VOD (hVOD) has been reported in the Australian cohort with VODI following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT); therefore, individuals with VODI are likely to have at least the population risk for hVOD following HSCT. The first successful HSCT was reported by Ganaiem et al [2013] suggesting that this may be an efficacious treatment modality with appropriate conditioning therapy. Ganaiem et al described a consanguineous Arab family with eight affected individuals; five individuals received HSCT, of which three were successful. All five individuals received matched sib or family member bone marrow (4 individuals) or peripheral stem cells (1 individual). All five individuals received conditioning with fludarabine and serotherapy and an alkylating agent (cyclophosphamide, busulfan, or treosulfan). The two individuals who died also received thiotepa, and following engraftment died with hVOD and multi-organ failure. One child has remained well for two years following uncomplicated HSCT in 2014. She was of consanguineous Lebanese background and presented at age four months with probable herpetic hepatitis which initially responded clinically to acyclovir, but then developed florid hVOD following a transfusion. She responded well to IVIG, prophylactic Bactrim™, and defibrotide. She was neurologically normal, but asymptomatic bilateral subdural hematomas were found on routine pre-transplant MRI despite a normal head ultrasound a week prior when coagulation studies and platelets had already normalized. At age six months she underwent an unrelated cord blood transplant with alemtuzumab, fludarabine, treosulfan and antithymocyte globulin conditioning. Defibrotide was prophylactically continued until two months post transplant. She remains neurologically normal and her MRI scan at age two years showed no anatomic abnormality [M Wong, personal communication]. In 2016, an Australian infant of consanguineous Lebanese background presented at age four months with Pneumocystis, CMV infection, and hVOD with hypogammaglobinemia. A homozygous SP110 pathogenic variant (c.642delC) was identified on molecular genetic testing. At age five months, after control of pneumonitis and hVOD, he received a haplo-identical paternal HSCT after depletion of α/β TCR and CD19+ cells. He received conditioning with fludarabine, treosulfan, and antithymocyte globulin. Defibrotide was given as hVOD prophylaxis. Two months post-transplant he was well and had engrafted without GVHD or recurrence of hVOD but with moderate CMV hepatitis. Defibrotide was able to be discontinued at day 60. Both the affected individual and donor were CMV positive prior to transplant. Seventy days following HSCT he developed seizures. MRI showed extensive abnormalities throughout the brain and spinal cord, including areas of edema and ring-like enhancing lesions. CT showed widespread calcifications. CMV retinitis was apparent and both CSF and vitreous were CMV PCR positive [T Cole, J Smart, and T Soosay Raj, personal communication]. Inclusion of defibrotide prophylaxis in the transplant regimen may improve survival. Omission of a second alkylating agent in the conditioning regimen may reduce the risk for transplant-related hVOD.