

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with von Willebrand disease (VWD), the following evaluations are recommended: A personal and family history of bleeding to help predict severity and tailor treatment. Use of a bleeding assessment tool can facilitate standardized assessment [International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis 2011, Tosetto et al 2011]. A joint and muscle evaluation for those with type 3 VWD (musculoskeletal bleeding is rare in types 1 and 2 VWD). Screening for hepatitis B and C as well as HIV if the diagnosis is type 3 VWD or if the individual received blood products or plasma-derived clotting factor concentrates before 1985. Baseline serum concentration of iron and ferritin to assess iron stores, as many individuals with VWD (particularly women with menorrhagia) are iron deficient Gynecologic evaluation for women with menorrhagia [Demers et al 2005] Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 See Nichols et al [2008] (full text) and Castaman et al [2013] (full text) for treatment guidelines. Individuals with VWD benefit from referral to a comprehensive bleeding disorders program for education, treatment, and genetic counseling. The two main treatments are desmopressin (1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin [DDAVP]) and clotting factor concentrates containing both VWF and FVIII (VWF/FVIII concentrate). Individuals with VWD should receive prompt treatment for severe bleeding episodes.

Desmopressin

 Most individuals with type 1 VWD and some with type 2 VWD respond to intravenous or subcutaneous treatment with desmopressin [Castaman et al 2008, Federici 2008, Leissinger et al 2014], which promotes release of stored VWF and raises levels three- to fourfold. Intranasal preparations are also available. Following VWD diagnosis, a desmopressin challenge is advisable to assess VWF response. Desmopressin is the treatment of choice for acute bleeding episodes or to cover surgery. Desmopressin has been used successfully to cover delivery in women with type 1 VWD and also for a proportion of pregnant women with type 2 VWD [Castaman et al 2010b] (see Pregnancy Management). In persons who do not tolerate desmopressin or who have a poor VWF response, clotting factor concentrate is required. Desmopressin is contraindicated in individuals with arteriovascular disease and in those older than age 70 years for whom VWF/FVIII concentrate is required. Note: Because desmopressin can cause hyponatremia (which can lead to seizures and coma), fluid intake should be restricted for 24 hours following its administration to minimize this risk.

Intravenous Infusion of VWF/FVIII Clotting Factor Concentrates

 In those who are non-responsive to desmopressin (i.e., VWF deficiency is not sufficiently corrected) and for those in whom desmopressin is contraindicated (see Treatment by VWD Type), bleeding episodes can be prevented or controlled with intravenous infusion of virally inactivated plasma-derived clotting factor concentrates containing both VWF and FVIII [Federici 2007]. Such concentrates are prepared from pooled blood donations from many donors. Virus inactivation procedures eliminate potential pathogens.

Indirect Treatments

 In addition to treatments that directly increase VWF levels, individuals with VWD often benefit from indirect hemostatic treatments, including: Fibrinolytic inhibitors (i.e., tranexamic acid for treatment or prevention of bleeding episodes); Hormonal treatments (i.e., the combined oral contraceptive pill for the treatment of menorrhagia).

Treatment by VWD Type

 Type 1 VWD. Treatments that directly increase VWF levels (e.g., desmopressin or VWF/FVIII clotting factor concentrates) are usually only needed for the treatment or prevention of severe bleeding, as with major trauma or surgery. Indirect treatment with fibrinolytic inhibitors or hormones is often effective. Type 2A VWD. Treatment with clotting factor concentrates is usually only required for the treatment or prevention of severe bleeding episodes such as during surgery. Responsiveness to desmopressin is variable and should be confirmed prior to therapeutic use. Indirect treatments can be beneficial. Type 2B VWD. Clotting factor concentrates are usually required to treat severe bleeding or at the time of surgery. Treatment with desmopressin should be undertaken cautiously as it can precipitate a worsening of any thrombocytopenia. People with certain pathogenic variants associated with mild or atypical 2B VWD, however, do not appear to develop thrombocytopenia when exposed to desmopressin. [Federici et al 2009] Indirect treatments (i.e., fibrinolytic inhibitors) can be useful. Type 2M VWD. Because desmopressin response is generally poor, VWF/FVIII concentrate is the treatment of choice. Type 2N VWD. Desmopressin can be used for minor bleeding, but because the FVIII level will drop rapidly (as FVIII is not protected by VWF), concentrate containing VWF as well as FVIII is required to cover surgical procedures. Type 3 VWD. Treatment often requires the repeated infusion of VWF/FVIII clotting factor concentrates [Franchini et al 2007]. Desmopressin is not effective in type 3 VWD. Indirect treatments may also be beneficial.

Pediatric Issues

 Special considerations for the care of infants and children with VWD include the following: Infant males should be circumcised only after consultation with a pediatric hemostasis specialist. Desmopressin should be used with caution, particularly in those under age two years, because of the potential difficulty in restricting fluids in this age group. VWF levels are higher in the neonatal period; thus, phenotypic testing for milder forms of VWD should be delayed until later in childhood.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Individuals with type 3 VWD are often given prophylactic infusions of VWF/FVIII concentrates to prevent musculoskeletal bleeding and subsequent joint damage.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Desmopressin should be used with caution, particularly in those under age two years, because of the potential difficulty in restricting fluids in this age group. Individuals with VWD should be vaccinated for hepatitis A and B [Nichols et al 2008, Castaman et al 2013]. Prevention of chronic joint disease is a concern for individuals with type 3 VWD; however, controversy exists regarding the specific schedule and dosing of prophylactic regimens. An international trial that investigated prophylactic treatment for symptoms including joint bleeding, nosebleeds, and menorrhagia concluded that rates of bleeding within individuals during prophylaxis were significantly lower than levels prior to prophylaxis [Berntorp et al 2010, Abshire et al 2013].

Surveillance

 Individuals with milder forms of VWD can benefit from being followed by treatment centers with experience in the management of bleeding disorders. Individuals with type 3 VWD should be followed in experienced centers and should have periodic evaluations by a physiotherapist to monitor joint mobility.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Activities with a high risk of trauma, particularly head injury, should be avoided. Medications with effects on platelet function (ASA, clopidogrel, or NSAIDs) should be avoided as they can worsen bleeding symptoms. Infant males should be circumcised only after consultation with a pediatric hemostasis specialist.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Once the familial pathogenic variant(s) have been identified, at-risk relatives can be readily analyzed for the pathogenic variant(s) to allow early diagnosis and treatment as needed [Keeney et al 2008]. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 VWF levels increase throughout pregnancy with the peak occurring in the third trimester. Nonetheless, pregnant women with VWD are at increased risk for bleeding complications and care should be provided in centers with experience in perinatal management of bleeding disorders [James & Jamison 2007, Varughese & Cohen 2007, James et al 2009]. Women with baseline VWF and FVIII levels of >30 IU/dL are likely to achieve normal levels by the time of delivery, whereas those with a basal level <20 IU/dL and those with baseline VWF:RCo/VWF:Ag ratio <0.6 are likely to require replacement therapy [Castaman et al 2013]. Although deliveries should occur based on obstetric indications, instrumentation should be minimized [Demers et al 2005]. Delayed, secondary postpartum bleeding may be a problem. VWF level rapidly returns to pre-pregnancy level following delivery [Castaman et al 2013].

Therapies Under Investigation

 Recombinant VWF is in clinical trials and is expected to be available for patient use in the near future. It may largely replace use of plasma-derived VWF, as has happened for FVIII and FIX recombinant products [Turacek et al 2010, Mannucci et al 2013]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.