http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/vps35-pd

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with VPS35-related Parkinson disease, the following evaluations are recommended: Perform neurologic examination including assessment of tremor, hypokinesia, rigidity, postural reflexes, gait (propulsion, arm swing, stride length), and autonomic findings (e.g., orthostasis). Assess cognitive function and psychiatric manifestations (e. g., hallucinations, delusions, depression, anxiety, sleep disorders). Evaluate levodopa response. Consider consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor.

Treatment of Manifestations

To date, the treatment of individuals with VPS35-PD does not differ from that of Parkinson disease in general. The following is a brief summary of recommended treatment for PD, based on extensive existing guidelines and recommendations for pharmacotherapy of motor and non-motor manifestations of PD as well as neurosurgical interventions for motor findings [Zesiewicz et al 2010, Oertel et al 2011a, Oertel et al 2011b, Seppi et al 2011, Ferreira et al 2013, Odin et al 2015, Trenkwalder et al 2015]. Pharmacotherapy. Drugs to treat motor manifestations include the precursor of dopamine, levodopa, in combination with a peripheral dopa decarboxylase inhibitor (carbidopa, benserazide), dopamine agonists, inhibitors of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) or monoamine oxidase-B (MAO-B), anticholinergics, and amantadine. A good levodopa response was seen in nearly all reported individuals with VPS35-PD. General recommendations for treatment of Parkinson disease of unknown cause include the following: To reduce or delay side effects (e.g., dyskinesias, hallucinations, impulse control disorder) of levodopa and dopaminergic medication, doses should not exceed the levels required for a satisfactory clinical response. In younger patients, dopamine agonists should be given a preference. Dyskinesias can be treated with reduction of levodopa doses, use of dopamine receptor agonists, deep-brain stimulation, and continuous application of levodopa or apomorphine. Patients treated with ergot-derived dopamine agonists require periodic echocardiograms. Ergot-derived dopaminergic drugs should be discontinued if fibrotic heart-valve changes are revealed [Antonini & Poewe 2007]. Deep brain stimulation to the subthalamic nucleus was repeatedly reported to be effective in the treatment of disabling motor fluctuations or dyskinesia in persons with VPS35-PD. Other. Overall, effective treatment for neuropsychiatric and autonomic symptoms (which may be disabling) is limited. Atypical neuroleptic agents such as low-dose clozapine and reduction of dopaminergic therapy can decrease delusions and hallucinations. If depression occurs, it should be treated according to guidelines. Droxidopa may be used to treat orthostasis. Patients also benefit from physical, occupational, and speech therapy.

Surveillance

For VPS35-PD (as well as in Parkinson disease in general), follow-up clinical neurologic evaluations are recommended every three to 12 months (depending on the clinical scenario and the needs of the individual) to assess tremor, hypokinesia, rigidity, gait, cognition, and neuropsychiatric symptoms as well as treatment effectiveness.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Neuroleptic drugs may increase the severity of parkinsonism in VPS35-PD (as in Parkinson disease in general). In general, atypical neuroleptics are less likely to exacerbate parkinsonism than typical neuroleptics. Other drugs that may induce or exacerbate parkinsonism include but are not limited to antidepressants, calcium channel blockers, valproate, lithium, and amiodarone [Bondon-Guitton et al 2011, Bohlega & Al-Foghom 2013].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Reports addressing pregnancy management in women with VPS35-PD are not available. The effect of PD in general on pregnancy has not been well characterized, since pregnancy is uncommon in women with PD. While most reports indicate that disease manifestations worsen during pregnancy, improvement has also been described (for a review see Robottom et al [2008], Kranick et al [2010]). No long-term outcome data exist for children born to mothers with Parkinson disease. Levodopa crosses the placenta and some animal models have shown that high doses of levodopa administered during pregnancy may induce skeletal and visceral malformations; however, in more than 30 cases reported in the literature, levodopa treatment during human pregnancy did not result in adverse fetal outcome [Scott & Chowdhury 2005]. Amantadine should be avoided during pregnancy, if possible, since adverse pregnancy outcomes have been reported in rats. Discussion of the risks and benefits of using a given medication during pregnancy should ideally take place prior to conception. See MotherToBaby to access further information on medication use during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.