http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/vws

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with an IRF6-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed: In individuals diagnosed with VWS: evaluation for the characteristic features of PPS: knee contractures with webbing behind the knee, genital anomalies, syndactyly of the toes, and the pyramidal skin-fold on the nail of the hallux. Based on the findings referral to the following specialists may be considered: Orthopedic surgery Urology Plastic surgery Feeding and hearing evaluation Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Individuals with a cleft lip and/or palate should be evaluated and treated by a multidisciplinary team of specialists. The American Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Association [2009] has published parameters for evaluation and treatment of patients with cleft lip/palate or other craniofacial anomalies that can guide treatment of these patients. Click here for full text. Management is supportive/symptomatic. Cleft lip. Management is surgical, dental, and orthodontic. Cleft palate. In addition to surgery, dentistry, and orthodontics, speech therapy and audiologic evaluation are usually needed. Otolaryngology evaluation is needed for management of middle ear effusions. Lip pits. Surgery may be indicated for cosmetic purposes or for lip function. The lip pits may be connected to mucous-secreting glands and may be excised for this. Eyelid and oral synechiae (ankyloblepharon and syngnathia, respectively) may require surgical excision. Syngnathia often requires emergent release due to feeding and respiratory concerns and may require tracheotomy. Popliteal pterygium. Management involves physical therapy and surgical and orthopedic intervention, as necessary. Syndactyly may require surgery. Abnormal genitalia may require surgery especially in the presence of cryptorchidism. The genital anomalies may result in infertility.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Timely treatment of otitis media secondary to eustachian tube dysfunction related to cleft palate is indicated to prevent secondary hearing loss. Some individuals may have pressure-equalizing tubes placed. Evaluations by a speech-language pathologist can aid in determining if speech therapy or other interventions are appropriate for a child with secondary hearing loss.

Surveillance

The following surveillance guidelines are adapted from the American Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Association [2009] parameters for evaluation and treatment of patients with cleft lip/palate or other craniofacial anomalies. Click here for full text. 
Neonatal period and infancy Weekly assessment of nutritional intake and weight gain during the first month of life Otolaryngologic evaluation Audiologic evaluation Assessment of prelinguistic speech-language development Dental evaluation Consultation with other specialists as applicable 
Longitudinal evaluation and treatment Audiologic evaluation as soon as possible in a neonate and again at the time of an infant’s first visit to a cleft clinic. The timing and frequency of follow-up evaluations should be based on the individual’s history of ear disease or hearing loss. Evaluations should be carried out routinely through adolescence. Dental evaluation at an infant’s first visit to the cleft clinic and within six months of the first tooth erupting, no later than age 12 months. Routine dental evaluation should continue throughout life. Otolaryngologic evaluation at an infant’s first visit to the cleft clinic and within the first six months of life. These evaluations should continue throughout adolescence. Speech-language pathology evaluation at an infant’s first visit to the cleft clinic to provide parents with information about speech and language development. By age six months, infants should be seen for assessment of prelinguistic speech-language development. During the first two years of life, children should be evaluated at least twice, and then at least annually until age six years. After age six years, evaluations should be at least annually until after adenoid involution, and then at least every two years until dental and skeletal maturity. Consultation with other specialists as applicable

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Offspring and/or sibs of an affected individual should be clinically examined for evidence of cleft palate including submucous cleft, lip abnormalities (pits or mounds), and the pyramidal skin-fold on the nail of the hallux, given the variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance of VWS and PPS. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.