http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/wagner

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with VCAN-related vitreoretinopathy, the following evaluations are recommended: Baseline ophthalmologic examination including best corrected visual acuity, assessment of intraocular pressure, slit-lamp examination of the anterior segment, and biomicroscopy and indirect ophthalmoscopy of the posterior segment Visual field examination Photographic fundus documentation Optical coherence tomography (OCT), if available. While not mandatory, OCT scan is useful to assess the vitreoretinal interface, quantify atrophic changes of the central retina, and evaluate for cystoid macular edema. Electroretinogram Orthoptic assessment Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

Refractive error is corrected by spectacles or contact lenses. Visually disabling cataract is treated by cataract surgery. Phacoemulsification and implantation of an intraocular lens in the capsular bag has become the widely adopted standard procedure; however, as emphasized by Edwards, cataract surgery in individuals with vitreoretinopathy and possibly preceding vitrectomy can be difficult and should be performed by an experienced surgeon [Miyamoto et al 2005, Edwards 2008]. Posterior capsule opacification after cataract surgery is treated with YAG laser capsulotomy. Retinal breaks are treated with laser retinopexy or cryocoagulation if no retinal detachment is present. Vitreoretinal surgery is indicated for retinal detachment, vitreoretinal traction involving the macula, or epiretinal membranes involving the macula.

Surveillance

Annual ophthalmologic examination by a vitreoretinal specialist is indicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to reduce morbidity by early diagnosis and treatment of ophthalmologic complications. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known. Ophthalmologic exam if the pathogenic variant in the family is not known See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.