http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/was

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 The following are appropriate: Referral to immunologist for management Platelet count and size T-cell subsets Immunoglobulin levels Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Treatment options vary based on the predicted disease burden in a particular individual.

Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome

 [Buchbinder et al 2014] Hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT). The only curative treatment clinically available for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is allogeneic HCT. Affected males who receive HCT from a matched healthy sib or closely matched unrelated donor before their second birthday have a greater than 90% probability of being cured of the disorder [Moratto et al 2011, Shin et al 2012]. Currently, males with a WAS pathogenic variant who meet the clinical diagnostic criteria for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS score 3-5), have markedly decreased WASP expression, and have a suitably matched donor are candidates for HCT. Myeloablative conditioning prior to transplantation is the most widely used approach, as reduced-intensity conditioning increases the risk of partial engraftment, which may not be curative [Moratto et al 2011]. Some symptoms (e.g., autoimmune disease) may take months to resolve following complete engraftment. Since the phenotype of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome may evolve over time, optimal timing of transplantation is challenging. Individuals with absent intracellular WASP detection in hematopoietic cells are likely to develop Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, although a minority will exhibit the milder X-linked thrombocytopenia (XLT) phenotype throughout their life span. HCT before development of autoimmunity and malignancy is highly desirable, and younger age at transplant is associated with improved long-term outcome following HCT; however, the use of multiple chemotherapeutic agents necessary to achieve myeloablation presents a risk in young infants. Individuals with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome who do not have a suitably matched donor but who experience life-threatening complications are candidates for gene therapy (see Therapies Under Investigation). Eczema. Topical steroids are the mainstay of therapy. When chronic infections of the skin worsen eczema, antibiotics may be useful. Infection. For those individuals with clinical signs or symptoms of infection, prompt evaluation and treatment is necessary. The initiation of empiric parenteral antibiotic treatment is necessary in the majority of individuals. The evaluation should be exhaustive until the source of the infection is uncovered. This may include invasive assessments, as cultures and isolation of the offending organism should be sought in order to guide therapy. If HCT is being considered, attention to the prevention and treatment of infectious complications is necessary to limit pre-transplant morbidity. Autoimmune disease. Treatment usually consists of judicious use of immunosuppressants tailored to the individual's diagnosis.

X-Linked Thrombocytopenia (XLT)

 The primary management of individuals with XLT (WAS score 1-2) remains controversial. Although long-term survival is excellent with conservative management of presenting symptoms, event-free survival is reduced by the substantial risk of severe, life-threatening or potentially debilitating complications [Albert et al 2010]. Serious bleeding episodes are generally restricted to the first 30 years of life. In contrast, the risk of developing autoimmune disease, malignancy, or a life-threatening infectious episode is rather constant throughout the individual’s lifetime. This persistent morbidity argues for HCT as a treatment option for such individuals. Given the excellent success in young children with classic Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, HCT may be considered a viable option for individuals with XLT if an HLA–identical donor can be identified. However, one needs to carefully weigh the advantage of a possible cure against the acute risks and long-term consequences of this procedure (e.g., risk of secondary malignancy, infertility). Thus, HCT in XLT needs to be decided on an individual basis.

X-Linked Neutropenia (XLN)

 Treatment of XLN is with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and appropriate antibiotics.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 See Treatment of Manifestations for discussion of hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT). 
            Infection Antibiotic prophylaxis. Prophylaxis for pneumonia secondary to Pneumocystis jiroveci, formerly known as Pneumocystis carinii (PCP) is indicated for infants with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome as they are at risk of developing PCP. Typical prophylaxis is Bactrim® (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) orally or pentamidine by intravenous or inhalation therapy. Individuals with recurrent bacterial sinopulmonary infections may benefit from prophylactic antibiotic use. Intravenous immune globulin. Replacement therapy with IVIgG by age six months is administered every three to four weeks or subcutaneously, usually on a weekly basis. IVIgG is a highly purified blood derivative (a combination of many specific antimicrobial antibodies). Routine childhood immunizations. Live vaccines should be avoided. Other “non-live” vaccinations can be given safely to individuals with a WAS-related disorder but may not generate protective levels of antibody. 
            Bleeding Splenectomy. Splenectomy is palliative, and while it may be life-saving in an individual with severe bleeding, it does not prevent any of the other possible complications of the disorder [Mullen et al 1993]. In a survey of clinical immunologists performed by the European and Pan American Groups on Immunodeficiencies, respondents from centers treating the highest numbers of individuals with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome did not recommend splenectomy [Conley et al 2003]. Because splenectomy significantly increases the risk of life-threatening infections in males with XLT [Albert et al 2011] as well as in males with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome who subsequently undergo HCT [Ozsahin et al 2008], it should be used with caution. Males who have had splenectomy must take antibiotics routinely for the rest of their lives because of the increased risk for overwhelming infection. Platelet transfusions. Platelet transfusions should be administered judiciously (e.g., for significant bleeding and surgical procedures).

Surveillance

 Regular follow-up is indicated to monitor blood counts, adequacy of the IVIgG replacement therapy, and other potential complications.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Circumcision of an at-risk newborn male should not be undertaken in the presence of thrombocytopenia. The use of over-the-counter medications should be discussed with a physician as some medications can interfere with platelet function. When possible, elective surgical procedures should be deferred until after HCT.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Evaluation of newborn at-risk males is recommended before any elective procedure such as circumcision. It is appropriate to test at-risk males so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment. Rapid screening of at-risk males may be accomplished by WASP staining using flow cytometry. Definitive testing is possible by molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant in the family is known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 There is no evidence that C-section reduces the risk of morbidity and mortality in males with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Gene therapy shows promise in the treatment of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, especially in severely affected males without an HLA-matched donor [Klein et al 2003, Qasim et al 2009, Boztug et al 2010]. However, initial attempts at gene therapy using a retroviral vector resulted in leukemic proliferation in several affected individuals. More recent attempts using a lentiviral vector in two clinical trials are promising. In the first trial, Italian investigators showed improvement of platelet counts, immune function, and clinical manifestations of the disease in three individuals at one year or longer after gene therapy [Aiuti et al 2013]. In the second trial, six out of seven individuals treated in London and Paris also showed improvement of immune function and clinical manifestations six to 42 months after treatment, without evidence of clonal expansion [Hacein-Bey Abina et al 2015]. For reasons that are not yet clear, neither trial resulted in reconstitution of normal platelet numbers, although bleeding episodes significantly reduced in number and severity with individuals becoming independent from transfusion and need for thrombopoietin agonists. Thus far, no evidence of leukemic transformation has been reported with the use of the lentivirus vector [Aiuti et al 2013]. Based on these observations, it can be concluded that lentiviral-mediated gene therapy for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is feasible and can result in significant benefit for treated individuals. Clearly, however, long-term observation is warranted to confirm the superior safety of lentiviral gene transfer as an alternative treatment option for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.