

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Weill-Marchesani syndrome (WMS), the following evaluations should be performed: Complete ophthalmologic examination  Evaluation by a medical geneticist  Cardiac echocardiogram 

Treatment of Manifestations

 It is not possible to generalize the management of the ocular complications of WMS. The medical treatment of glaucoma is difficult because of paradoxical response to miotics and mydriatics.  A peripheral iridectomy should be performed to prevent or relieve pupillary block [Chang et al 2002, Ritch et al 2003].  Lens extraction and/or trabeculectomy may be necessary in some persons with advanced chronic angle closure glaucoma [Harasymowycz & Wilson 2004].  Individuals with WMS were recently reported to have increased central corneal thickness, which needs to be considered in the diagnosis and follow-up of glaucoma because increased central corneal thickness may lead to overestimation of intraocular pressure by applanation tonometers [Razeghinejad & Safavian 2006]. 

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Airway management during anesthesia can be difficult in persons with WMS because of stiff joints, poorly aligned teeth, and maxillary hypoplasia [Dal et al 2003, Karabiyik 2003, Riad et al 2006].

Surveillance

 Periodic ophthalmic examinations for early detection and removal of an ectopic lens can help decrease the possibility of pupillary block and glaucoma.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Use of ophthalmic miotics and mydriatics should be avoided as they can induce pupillary block.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 The protein product of ADAMTS10 could be a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of autosomal recessive WMS [Jones 2006]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.