http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/werner

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Werner syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Screening for type 2 diabetes mellitus by standard clinical assays including fasting glucose level, hemoglobin A1c, or oral glucose tolerance test Lipid profile Physical examination for cancers common in Werner syndrome (e.g., thyroid nodules, skin tumors) Ophthalmologic examination including slit lamp examination Skin examination for common findings, especially early ulcerations of the feet, with special attention to nail beds and soles of feet for lentiginous melanoma Head MRI if neurologic symptoms including new-onset seizures, focal neurologic signs such as weakness or visual field defect, or symptoms such as diploplia or headache are present. These can be indicative of meningioma, a common neoplasm in Werner syndrome. Assessment of coping and psychological fitness in light of prognosis Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor Infants with Werner syndrome are unaffected at birth; thus, no special precautions or investigations are recommended in the neonatal period.

Treatment of Manifestations

The following are appropriate: Aggressive treatment of skin ulcers with standard or novel techniques [Yeong & Yang 2004]. Bosentan has been reported to be effective in the treatment of digital ulcers in individuals with systemic sclerosis, and its use has been recently reported to be beneficial in people with Werner syndrome [Matucci-Cerinic et al 2011, Noda et al 2011]. Control of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Favorable results have been reported with use of pioglitazone and sitagliptin [Durbin 2004, Yokote et al 2004, Watanabe et al 2013]. Use of cholesterol-lowering drugs if lipid profile is abnormal. Muscle atrophy is a potential complication. Surgical treatment of ocular cataracts. Complications are common and specific techniques can optimize outcome [Ruprecht 1989, Shintani et al 1993]. Treatment of malignancies in a standard fashion

Prevention of Secondary Complications

To prevent secondary complications: Lifestyle counseling for smoking avoidance, regular exercise, and weight control to reduce atherosclerosis risk Excellent skin care, trauma avoidance, and examination to treat problems early

Surveillance

Appropriate surveillance includes the following: Screening for type 2 diabetes mellitus at least annually Annual lipid profile At least annual physical examination for malignancies common in Werner syndrome and other skin manifestations Annual ophthalmologic examination for cataracts Attention to symptoms of angina, or peripheral or cerebrovascular disease

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Smoking and excess weight increase the risk of atherosclerosis. Trauma to the extremities should be avoided.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband/at-risk relatives in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known; Clinical examination including growth assessment, skin examination, and ophthalmology evaluation including slit lamp examination if the pathogenic variants in the family are not known. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

In one study of individuals with Werner syndrome, signs of hypogonadism were reported in 80%; however, approximately half of those had children and showed signs of hypogonadism after age 30 years [Goto 1997]. Reports in the medical literature of pregnancy in individuals with Werner syndrome are rare, many of the women in the International Registry of Werner Syndrome have had offspring. Preterm delivery has been reported in several cases, and has been attributed to cervical incompetence. Preeclampsia is another reported obstetric complication [Murakami et al 2003]. The use of assisted reproductive technologies such as in vitro fertilization and egg donation has not been reported in women with Werner syndrome.

Therapies Under Investigation

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

Affected individuals may benefit from reproductive advice regarding the rapid decline in fertility. Although topical PDGF-BB has been shown to provide some improvement of granulation, it failed to heal the ulcer in a person with Werner syndrome [Wollina et al 2004].