http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/wfs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a WFS1-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended: 
            Wolfram syndrome and Wolfram-like syndrome Glucose tolerance test (if not already performed) Eye examination, including visual acuity, color vision, and visual fields Audiologic examination, including auditory brain stem responses (ABRs) and evoked otoacoustic emissions Neurologic examination Neuroimaging with MRI Developmental assessment in young children and assessment of cognitive abilities in older children and adolescents Baseline psychologic assessment Urologic consultation with imaging studies of the urinary tract and kidneys Test of the concentrating ability of urine to evaluate for diabetes insipidus Clinical genetics consultation 
            Low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss (LFSNHL) Audiologic examination

Treatment of Manifestations

 Diabetes mellitus. Treatment follows routine practices for insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Optic atrophy. Treatment of decreased visual acuity is symptomatic (e.g., low-vision aids). 
            Hearing impairment WFS. Hearing loss is managed with either hearing aids or cochlear implant depending on the degree of hearing impairment and the frequencies affected. Low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss (LFSNHL). Hearing aids should be tried early on, but may not be necessary until later in the disease course when a broader range of frequencies is involved. Hearing should be assessed throughout childhood in order to provide hearing aids when clinically indicated. Developmental delay/cognitive impairment. Treatment follows routine practices. Psychiatric difficulties. Treatment follows routine practices. Neurogenic bladder. Treatment follows routine practices. Patients with recurrent urinary infections, urodynamic abnormalities, and incomplete bladder emptying must be treated according to established protocols for these abnormalities, like clean intermittent self-catheterizations or indwelling catheter, and frequent surveillance of presence of urinary infections. 
            Other Treatment of central diabetes insipidus follows routine practices. Treatment of gastroparesis and celiac disease follows routine practices. (See Celiac Disease.)

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Prevention of diabetes mellitus related complications is through optimization of glycemic control following established guidelines.

Surveillance

 Wolfram syndrome. Regular evaluations including the following to detect manifestations that can occur with time: Diabetes mellitus: tests of glucose tolerance Optic atrophy: ophthalmologic examination Sensorineural hearing loss: audiologic examination including speech discrimination testing Neurologic deficits: neurologic examination including assessment of memory, personality changes Psychiatric abnormalities: assessment for signs including depression, suicidal behavior, and changes in personal appearance and social behavior Urologic abnormalities: urodynamic examination and assessment of ability to empty the bladder. Regular urine cultures when bladder dysfunction or other renal tract abnormality is present. Diabetes insipidus: assessment of concentrating ability of the urine Growth delay: monitoring of linear growth in children using standard growth charts Hypogonadism Puberty: monitoring for signs of onset of puberty Once diabetes mellitus is present, regular follow-up for complications that can occur with time, including evaluations for: Diabetic retinopathy Microalbuminuria Because women with WFS may develop diabetes insipidus during pregnancy [Rugolo et al 2002], monitoring for diabetes insipidus during pregnancy is warranted. Low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss (LFSNHL). Regular audiologic examination including speech discrimination testing is appropriate.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Wolfram syndrome. Sibs of a proband warrant either molecular genetic testing (if the family-specific pathogenic variants are known) or screening for the earliest manifestations of WFS (i.e., diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and sensorineural hearing loss) to allow for early diagnosis and treatment. Low-frequency sensorineural hearing loss (LFSNHL). At-risk relatives should be encouraged to seek either molecular genetic testing (if the family-specific pathogenic variant is known) or audiologic evaluation because the earliest manifestations of low-tone hearing loss may not be appreciated clinically. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Pregnant women with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus have a two- to eightfold higher risk than pregnant women without diabetes of having a child with a birth defect or a pattern of birth defects (diabetic embryopathy). These defects can involve the craniofacial, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, urogenital, musculoskeletal, and central nervous systems. Optimizing glucose control before and during pregnancy can reduce, but does not eliminate, the risk for diabetic embryopathy. High-resolution fetal ultrasonography and fetal echocardiogram are recommended to screen for congenital anomalies during pregnancy. Consultation with a maternal fetal medicine specialist during pregnancy should also be considered.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.