http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/wilson

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Wilson disease, the following evaluations are recommended: Evaluation of severity of the liver disease by liver biopsy or by biochemical testing and imaging of the liver Upper GI endoscopy to exclude or confirm esophageal varices Detailed clinical neurologic assessment. A validated neurologic rating scale is available [Członkowska et al 2007]. Brain MRI to assess for structural alteration Assessment of kidney function Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 The goal of therapy is to institute treatment with chelating agents as soon as possible in individuals with symptomatic Wilson disease. See extensive review by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases [Roberts & Schilsky 2008] (full text) and EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines: Wilson's disease [European Association for Study of Liver 2012] (full text). Treatment is life long, including during pregnancy. If one treatment modality is discontinued, an alternative modality must be substituted. Discontinuation of all treatment leads to hepatic and neurologic decompensation, which is usually refractory to further medical intervention. Copper chelating agents that increase urinary excretion of copper are the first-line treatment for persons with symptomatic Wilson disease. Note: Routine institution of chelation therapy before age three years has not been adequately assessed and may have adverse effects on growth. D-penicillamine (chelator). Used since the 1950s as first-line therapy for Wilson disease [Durand et al 2001, Walshe 2003a], D-penicillamine is given as tablets by mouth two or three times daily. Pyridoxine must be given along with D-penicillamine. Twenty-four-hour urine copper excretion is used to confirm chelation and increased excretion of copper. Urinary copper values should be five to ten times normal; if the values are lower, non-compliance may be an issue, or body copper stores may have been adequately depleted. Complete blood count and urinalysis must be monitored regularly during D-penicillamine therapy. Serious side effects can occur in up to 30% of individuals, and include: severe thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, aplastic anemia, proteinuria, nephrotic syndrome, polyserositis, Goodpasture syndrome, and severe skin reactions. An early allergic reaction with fever, rash, and proteinuria may occur. Evidence of any such side effects may require discontinuation of D-penicillamine and substitution of an alternate treatment. If such alternate therapies are unavailable, D-penicillamine-induced adverse events may be manageable by co-administration of steroids. D-penicillamine inhibits collagen cross-linking and has some immunosuppressant properties. After decades of treatment, individuals may have abnormal skin and connective tissue collagen, and possible chronic depletion of copper and (possibly) other trace metals. D-penicillamine should NOT be used simultaneously with zinc, pending adequate clinical assessment of this treatment strategy. Trientine (chelator), also known as triethylene tetramine dihydrochloride (2,2,2-tetramine) or trien, is the usual second-line treatment for individuals who cannot tolerate D-penicillamine. It is gaining acceptance as a first-line drug because of good efficiency and better tolerance than D-penicillamine; however, it is still not generally available in all countries. Complete blood count and urinalysis must be monitored regularly in all individuals on trientine. Rare side effects include gastritis with nausea and, in cases of overtreatment, iron deficiency anemia. Trientine should NOT be used simultaneously with zinc pending adequate assessment of this combination. Current reports suggest that the combination of trientine and zinc, temporally dispersed throughout the day such that each drug is administered 5-6 hours apart from the other, may be effective in severely decompensated hepatic Wilson disease [Santos Silva et al 1996, Askari et al 2003]. Zinc (metallothionein inducer). High-dose oral zinc interferes with absorption of copper from the gastrointestinal tract presumably by inducing enterocyte metallothionein, which preferentially binds copper from the intestinal contents and is lost in the feces as enterocytes are shed in normal turnover. Zinc therapy is most effective after initial decoppering with a chelating agent [Brewer 2001, Brewer et al 2001]. In selected cases, it can be used as an initial treatment [Milanino et al 1992, Linn et al 2009]. Zinc is taken as tablets by mouth at least twice (usually 3x) daily, before meals. The dose is based on the elemental zinc in the tablet. Twenty-four-hour urine copper excretion is used to monitor total body copper stores, which should decrease. Increase of urinary copper excretion under zinc therapy may indicate insufficient treatment efficacy [Weiss et al 2011]. The computed estimate of non-ceruloplasmin-bound copper may be used to titrate the zinc dose. Serum or urinary zinc concentration can be measured to monitor compliance in individuals taking zinc. Note: (1) Gastritis, a common side effect, can be reduced with the use of zinc acetate or zinc gluconate; (2) zinc should NOT be used simultaneously with any chelator, pending further clinical investigation. Antioxidants. Serum and hepatic vitamin E concentrations are reported to be low in individuals with Wilson disease [Sokol et al 1994, Ogihara et al 1995], likely because of excessive consumption to counteract free radicals produced by excess copper. Antioxidants such as vitamin E may be used along with a chelator or zinc in protecting tissues from damage. Restriction of foods very high in copper (liver, brain, chocolate, mushrooms, shellfish, and nuts) is likely prudent, especially at the beginning of treatment. It is recommended that individuals with special dietary needs (e.g., vegetarians) consult with a trained dietitian. Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) is reserved for individuals who fail to respond to medical therapy or cannot tolerate it because of serious adverse side effects [Schilsky et al 1994, Emre et al 2001, Sutcliffe et al 2003]. It remains controversial whether orthotopic liver transplantation should be a primary treatment for individuals with Wilson disease who have severe neurologic disease [Medici et al 2005, Weiss et al 2013a].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 Medical therapy is recommended for asymptomatic patients to prevent development of symptoms (see Treatment of Manifestations).

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Monitoring of patients under therapy should include routine assessments of treatment efficacy by biochemical testing and clinical evaluation: Insufficient therapy, underdosage, or malcompliance could lead to reaccumulation of copper and development of new symptoms. Adverse events related to medical treatment (especially under D-penicillamine treatment) should be evaluated. Excessive long-term treatment could result in copper deficiency, leading to immobilization of iron (as observed in aceruloplasminemia) and to neurologic symptoms of copper deficiency [Horvath et al 2010, da Silva-Júnior et al 2011].

Surveillance

 According to current guidelines (AASLD [Roberts & Schilsky 2008] and EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines [European Association for Study of Liver 2012]), routine monitoring should include the following examinations: At least twice annually: serum copper and ceruloplasmin, liver biochemistries, international normalized ratio, complete blood count, urinalysis, and physical examination including neurologic assessment Note: Patients receiving chelation therapy require a complete blood count and urinalysis regularly, no matter how long they have been on treatment At least once annually: 24-hour urinary excretion of copper Note: Measurements are recommended more frequently if there are questions on compliance or if dosage of medications is adjusted.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Foods very high in copper (liver, brain, chocolate, mushrooms, shellfish, and nuts) should be avoided, especially at the beginning of treatment.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 The goal is to identify those sibs of a proband who have Wilson disease preferably before symptoms occur so that the therapies described under Treatment of Manifestations can be initiated as soon as possible. Evaluations can include the following: Molecular genetic testing if both ATP7B pathogenic variants in the proband are known If the pathogenic variants in an affected family member are not known, biochemical assessment of parameters of copper metabolism (serum copper, urinary copper, ceruloplasmin) and liver function tests as well as ultrasound imaging of the liver and slit lamp examination for the presence of Kayser-Fleischer rings Note: Because presymptomatic individuals generally have a low serum concentration of ceruloplasmin and mildly increased basal 24-hour urinary copper excretion, biochemical testing can be used; however, sometimes asymptomatic affected individuals cannot be distinguished from heterozygotes. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Treatment must be continued during pregnancy because of the risk of fulminant hepatic failure. D-penicillamine has been used in many pregnancies with no adverse outcomes; however, congenital connective tissue disorders encompassing inguinal hernias and skin laxity have been reported in some exposed infants. Such adverse outcomes may depend on dose, which should be kept as low as possible. The dose of D-penicillamine should be maintained at the lowest effective dose with the plan to reduce by approximately 30% in the third trimester if the mother has been well chelated prior to pregnancy. A possible over-chelated (copper deficiency) status prior to pregnancy or genetic characteristics of the mother can contribute to fetal abnormalities [Pinter et al 2004]. Trientine has been used successfully during pregnancy, but the total number of reported cases is small. Reduction of the dose to the lowest effective dose is recommended using a comparable approach to that for D-penicillamine. Zinc has been used effectively during pregnancy. See www.mothertobaby.org for more information on medication use during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Ammonium tetrathiomolybdate (chelator) interferes with copper absorption from the intestine and binds plasma copper with high affinity. It may be useful for treatment of severe neurologic Wilson disease because, unlike D-penicillamine, it appears not to be associated with early neurologic deterioration [Brewer et al 2003]. However, the ammonium salt has not proven suitable for oral formulations. Choline tetrathiomolybdate (chelator) is a more stable salt formulation of tetrathiomolybdate and is currently under investigation for Wilson disease [Weiss et al 2015]. Curcumin. Experimental in vitro studies suggest partially restored protein expression of some ATP7B mutants by curcumin [van den Berghe et al 2009]. This could enable novel treatment strategies in Wilson disease by directly enhancing the protein expression of mutated ATP7B with residual copper export activity. Furthermore, curcumin is an ideal antioxidant and an effective scavenger of reactive oxygen species and can act as a copper chelating agent. However, clinical data in patients with Wilson disease are not yet available. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.