

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome (WSS), the following evaluations are recommended: Endocrine. Evaluation for possible endocrine findings (if not done at the time of diagnosis) relating to: hypogonadism, low IGF-1, diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism Ectodermal. Assessment of scalp hair 
                Neurologic Neurologic examination for evidence of dystonia (if not done at the time of diagnosis) (see Dystonia Overview) Speech and language assessment of dysarthria and dysphagia Assessment of hearing (see Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness) Assessment of psychomotor development (in young children) or intellectual ability in individuals older than age six years Other. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 No specific treatment exists for WSS. All treatment is symptomatic.

Endocrine

 Hypogonadism. Sex hormone replacement therapy at the usual age of puberty to induce and maintain secondary sex characteristics and promote bone health Note: Standard replacement hormonal treatment will not promote fertility. It may be possible to stimulate testes with gonadotropins and harvest sperm with assisted reproductive technology. Low IGF-1. Treatment with recombinant IGF-1 not recommended: no evidence shows that it improves the clinical features of WSS [Agopiantz et al 2014]. Of note, IGF-1 levels may increase with sex hormone replacement therapy. Diabetes mellitus. Standard treatment Hypothyroidism. L-thyroxine replacement therapy

Ectodermal

 Treatment is symptomatic and cosmetic only.

Neurologic

 
              Movement disorders Dystonia. Treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms [Albanese et al 2015]: Oral medications are usually tried first: Anticholinergics such as trihexyphenidyl (moderately effective for ~40%-50% of individuals) Trihexyphenidyl can be titrated to high doses (~100 mg/day) in younger individuals. Anticholinergic side effects, particularly cognitive effects, must be monitored closely. Baclofen (Lioresal®) Benzodiazepines, especially clonazepam Other medications tried alone or in combination with the above categories: levodopa, carbamazepine, and dopamine depleting agents (reserpine, tetrabenazine) Botulinum toxin injections directly into dystonic muscles are generally the treatment of choice for adult-onset focal dystonias. For individuals with more widespread dystonia in whom specific muscle groups produce disabling symptoms, such injections may also be helpful, and are often used in combination with oral medications. If medications fail, surgery to enable deep-brain stimulation (DBS) of the globus pallidus interna (GPi) has been shown to be an effective treatment for some forms of medically refractory primary generalized dystonia [Vidailhet et al 2007, Crowell & Shah 2016]. Its use in WSS has not been documented. Dysarthria. Consultation with a speech therapist may be helpful. Dysphagia. Oral secretions in individuals with bulbar symptoms can be reduced with tricylic antidepressants and anticholinergic agents, thus reducing the need for suctioning. Swallowing difficulties can be alleviated by thickening liquids and pureeing solid food, as well as eventually using a gastrostomy tube to help maintain caloric intake and hydration. Nutritional management by a knowledgeable nutritionist is helpful. Sensorineural hearing loss. See Hereditary Hearing Loss and Deafness.

Surveillance

 Monitor for endocrine abnormalities: Hypogonadism at age 12-14 years Diabetes mellitus in the teens and later Hypothyroidism in the teens and later Neurologic manifestations should be monitored by experts in rehabilitative medicine, speech, and swallowing. Dystonia may require monitoring by a neurologist. Monitor hearing annually.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Persons with dystonia should avoid situations in which the risk of falling is increased.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Molecular genetic testing for known familial DCAF17 pathogenic variants is appropriate for the evaluation of apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who will benefit from early identification and treatment of potential complications. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.