http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/x-ald

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Brain MRI

Adrenal function tests [Dubey et al 2005]

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



When adrenal insufficiency is identified in an affected male, corticosteroid replacement therapy is essential and can be lifesaving. (Corticosteroid replacement therapy has no effect on nervous system involvement.)

Affected boys benefit from the general supportive care of parents, as well as psychological and educational support.

Physical therapy, management of urologic complications, and family and vocational counseling are of value for men with adrenomyeloneuropathy, many of whom maintain successful personal and professional lives [Silveri et al 2004].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) ) is an option for boys and adolescents in early stages of symptom set 1 who have evidence of brain involvement on MRI.

Because HSCT is associated with a 20% risk for morbidity and mortality, it is recommended only for individuals with evidence of brain involvement by MRI but minimal neuropsychologic findings (performance IQ >80) and normal clinical neurologic examination.

HSCT is not recommended for individuals with severe neurologic and neuropsychologic dysfunction (i.e., performance IQ <80) [Shapiro et al 2000, Baumann et al 2003, Loes et al 2003, Peters et al 2004, Mahmood et al 2005, Resnick et al 2005].

Surveillance



Adrenal function should be reevaluated periodically in males with X-ALD whose initial evaluation revealed normal adrenal cortical function [Dubey et al 2005].

Males with X-ALD should undergo brain MRI every six months through childhood and then yearly to monitor for the development of cerebral disease [Peters et al 2004] because MRI abnormalities occur well in advance of clinical disease [Loes et al 2003] and the evidence clearly shows that HSCT has the best outcome when performed on an asymptomatic individual [Shapiro et al 2000, Peters et al 2004, Mahmood et al 2007].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from timely treatment of adrenal insufficiency [Mahmood et al 2005].

If the ABCD1 pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives.

If the ABCD1 pathogenic variant in the family is not known, very long chain fatty acid analysis may be used with the limitations previously discussed to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



In a single-arm study of presymptomatic boys with a normal MRI, reduction of hexacosanoic acid (C26:0) by Lorenzo's oil was associated with a reduced risk of developing MRI abnormalities and, therefore, childhood cerebral disease. The authors emphasized that the benefits of therapy required the reduction of C26:0 and that the amount of reduction correlated with lowered risk. Despite this reduction, some individuals still developed childhood cerebral disease. It is emphasized that the study was an open trial without a placebo group; thus, the results should be interpreted with some caution. The use of Lorenzo's oil remains an investigational therapy [Moser et al 2005].

A trial of ex vivo gene therapy is presently on-going.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.