

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED), the following evaluations are recommended: Initial evaluation of the developing dentition, typically accomplished by palpating the dental alveolus of the infant/toddler to establish if developing tooth buds (which manifest as bulges in alveolus) are present. A dental evaluation by age one year is recommended. Dental radiographs, essential to determining the extent of hypodontia and frequently taken in the toddler or child using panoramic or conventional dental radiographic techniques Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management of affected individuals targets the three cardinal features and is directed at optimizing psychosocial development, establishing optimal oral function, and preventing hyperthermia. Hypotrichosis. Wigs or special hair care formulas and techniques to manage sparse, dry hair may be useful. One report describes a child with HED and alopecia who was treated with topical minoxidil to the scalp and had resultant hair growth [Lee et al 2013]. Hypohidrosis. During hot weather, affected individuals must have access to an adequate supply of water and a cool environment, which may mean air conditioning, a wet T-shirt, and/or a spray bottle of water. Some individuals may benefit from "cooling vests." Affected individuals learn to control their exposure to heat and to minimize its consequences, but special situations may arise in which intervention by physicians and families is helpful. For example, a physician may have to prescribe an air conditioner before a school district complies, or parents may have to advocate for children who need to carry liquids into areas where they are prohibited. 
            Hypodontia Dental treatment, ranging from simple restorations to dentures, must begin at an early age. Bonding of conical shaped teeth in young affected individuals improves aesthetics and chewing ability. Orthodontics may be necessary. Dental implants in the anterior portion of the mandibular arch have proven successful only in children age seven years and older [Kramer et al 2007, Stanford et al 2008]. Children with HED typically need to have their dental prostheses replaced every 2.5 years. Dental implants in adults can support aesthetic and functional dentition. Hyposalivation is present in some individuals, predisposing them to dental caries and the need for therapeutics directed at maintaining oral lubrication and caries control. Dietary counseling may be helpful for those individuals who have trouble chewing and swallowing despite adequate dental care. 
            Other Regular visits with an ENT physician may be necessary for management of the nasal and aural concretions. Commonly, nasal and aural concretions must be removed with suction devices or forceps and recommendations made about humidification of the ambient air to prevent their formation [Mehta et al 2007]. Skin care products are useful for management of eczema and rashes and for dry skin associated with certain outdoor exposures like swimming. Lubrication eye drops can be helpful for dry eyes.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Saliva substitutes and optimal fluoride exposure may be helpful in preventing dental caries in those individuals having a marked reduction in salivary flow. Other dental caries preventive approaches such as pit and fissure sealants can be beneficial as well.

Surveillance

 The first dental visit should occur by age one year to monitor tooth and maxillary/mandibular development and for anticipatory guidance for parents. The developing dentition should be evaluated every six to 12 months to monitor existing treatments and to provide continued interventions as needed.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Individuals with severe hypohidrosis can have marked heat intolerance; care should be taken to prevent exposure to extreme heat and the potential for febrile seizures.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic, at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early diagnosis and treatment and, importantly, measures to avoid hyperthermia. Evaluations can include: Molecular genetic testing if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are known; Targeted history, physical examination, and dental examination for the features of HED if the pathogenic variant(s) in the family are not known. A sweat test can be done in at-risk relatives of an individual with XLHED. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Optimal prenatal nutrition is recommended for mothers who are carriers of or affected with HED. Affected women at risk for hyperthermia should take extra care not to become overheated during pregnancy. There are no other special recommendations for pregnancy management. Some women may have difficulty breastfeeding their infants because of hypoplasia of the mammary glands.

Therapies Under Investigation

 A Phase II clinical trial was conducted at several US and European medical centers to investigate the use of EDI200, developed by Edimer Pharmaceuticals, Inc [Huttner 2014]. The results of the study were inconclusive. EDI200 is an ectodysplasin-A1 (EDA-A1) replacement protein that has been shown to bind specifically to the EDA-A1 receptor (EDAR) and activate the signaling pathway that leads to normal ectodermal development. EDI200 has demonstrated permanent correction of the disease manifestations in both mouse and dog models of X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, with reduction in mortality and morbidity [Huttner 2014]. For additional information on the clinical trial click here Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.