http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/x-lpd

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with X-linked lymphoproliferative disease (XLP), the following evaluations are recommended: Physical examination to evaluate for rashes, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and neurologic dysfunction Evaluation of blood and bone marrow compartments (CBC and bone marrow biopsy) Determination of the extent of liver involvement by measuring serum concentration of transaminases, bilirubin, triglycerides, sodium, and lactate dehydrogenase Identification of potential infectious cofactors (especially viral infection or reactivation) that would require specific treatment Testing to assess immune function including lymphocyte subset analysis (T cell, B cell, NK cell) and serum concentrations of IgG, IgM, and IgA Establishing the presence or extent of CNS involvement by evaluating the CSF and performing neuroimaging and neuropsychological assessment Evaluation of inflammatory factors including serum concentrations of ferritin, sIL2Rα, and other cytokines Evaluation and monitoring of PT, PTT, and fibrinogen Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 No formal management guidelines exist; the following are general considerations. Individuals with XLP who develop fulminant EBV infection/HLH often improve with early treatment (e.g., based on HLH-1994 protocol) similar to that used in other life-threatening genetic hemophagocytic disorders including familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) [Henter et al 1997, Jordan et al 2011], typically consisting of etoposide and steroids. Rituximab (anti-CD20 antibody) [Milone et al 2005, Lee et al 2006] as well as IVIG may also be considered. Allogeneic HCT is the only curative therapy and should be strongly considered in individuals with confirmed XLP1 as early in life as is feasible [Lankester et al 2005]. Successful outcomes have been reported with the use of matched sib donors and marrow or umbilical cord blood from unrelated donors [Gross et al 1996, Filipovich 2001, Lankester et al 2005]. Overall survival appears to be approximately 80%, regardless of conditioning regimen used. However, survival of affected individuals who received a transplant was increased if they were transplanted prior to an episode of HLH [Booth et al 2011]. The outcomes of allogeneic HCT for males with XLP2 are less certain at this time. Early evidence suggests that reduced-intensity conditioning regimens should be considered due to very poor early experience with myeloablative preparative regimens [Marsh et al 2013]. Hypogammaglobulinemia is treated with IVIG. Lymphoma associated with XLP1 is treated with the standard chemotherapy appropriate to the tumor diagnosis. Once lymphoma remission is achieved, the individual should quickly proceed to allogeneic HCT. Colitis associated with XLP2 is treated symptomatically and with immunosuppression similar to that used for irritable bowel disease.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

 It is recommended that boys with known or suspected XLP and hypogammaglobulinemia receive regular intravenous (IV) IgG replacement therapy every three to four weeks until definitive treatment can be provided. HCT is the only curative therapy and should be considered in children with confirmed XLP as early in life as possible.

Surveillance

 No formal surveillance guidelines exist; the following are general considerations: Blood should be monitored by EBV-PCR for evidence of EBV infection if symptoms of infection or HLH develop. Blood counts, hepatic profiles, coagulation studies, and inflammatory markers (ferritin, soluble IL2R) should be monitored as needed based on clinical status for early evidence of HLH. IgG levels should also be monitored as needed based on clinical phenotype.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Individuals with XLP who come into contact with EBV are at risk until curative treatment with allogeneic HCT has been performed. Individuals are also at risk of developing HLH or inflammatory problems with other infections.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Once the pathogenic variant has been identified in a proband, molecular genetic testing of at-risk sibs and other maternal male relatives is appropriate for medical management and for consideration of presymptomatic bone marrow transplantation. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.