

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with X-linked ocular albinism (XLOA), the following evaluations are recommended: Medical history and physical examination, including a careful evaluation of pigmentation status at birth and later to distinguish between oculocutaneous and ocular albinism A complete ophthalmologic evaluation Dilated retinal examination of any at-risk possible carrier (mother, daughter) for the classic retinal carrier state Dermatologic consultation for sun-protective lotion and sun-protective clothing and avoidance of associated cumulative solar damage Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Refractive errors should be treated with appropriate spectacle correction as early as possible. Photodysphoria can be relieved by sunglasses, transition lenses, or special filter glasses, although many prefer not to wear them because of the reduction in vision from the dark lenses when indoors. Abnormal head posture with dampening of the nystagmus in a null point may be modified with prismatic spectacle correction. Strabismus surgery is usually not required but may be performed for cosmetic purposes, particularly if the strabismus or the face turn is marked or fixed. The need for vision aids and the educational needs of the visually impaired should be addressed. Dermatologic counseling for age-appropriate sun-protective lotions and clothing should be sought.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 Appropriate education for sun-protective lotions and clothing (preferably by an informed dermatologic consultant) is indicated to moderate the cumulative lifelong effects of solar radiation.

Surveillance

 Children younger than age 16 years with ocular albinism should have an annual ophthalmologic examination (including assessment of refractive error and the need for filter glasses) and psychosocial and educational support. In adults, ophthalmologic examinations should be undertaken when needed, typically every two to three years.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Although no formal trials exist, standard care avoids use or application of sun-sensitizing drugs or agents.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other

 Nystagmus dampening has been achieved by bilateral horizontal rectus recession surgery in some centers, but this is not a generally accepted treatment nor is there evidence from a comparative clinical trial that such intervention improves the final visual outcome.