http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/x-pvh

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with FLNA-related periventricular nodular heterotopia (PVNH) the following evaluations are recommended: Evaluation by a neurologist Evaluation by an epileptologist if seizures are present Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the intracranial vessels, carotid arteries, and aorta to address the increased risk for stroke Echocardiogram or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRA) to evaluate for valvular dysplasia, congenital cardiac anomalies, or aortic and vascular disease. Because of the potential risk for congenital cardiovascular anomalies and/or aortic aneurysm, a baseline evaluation by a cardiologist may be prudent. Evaluation by a hematologist if findings suggest a bleeding diathesis Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Management of individuals with FLNA-related PVNH is directed toward symptomatic treatment. Treatment of epilepsy generally follows basic principles for a seizure disorder caused by a known structural brain abnormality, including: Detailed initial history and evaluation to confirm the suspicion of a seizure disorder. Testing may include an electroencephalogram (EEG) to define the location and severity of electrical brain dysfunction that may be present in individuals with epilepsy. Repeat imaging may be necessary only in the setting of new neurologic findings on examination. Treatment with antiepileptic agents. Choice of antiepileptics is generally made empirically based on the clinical features of the seizure disorder. However, because no significant differences exist between medications for newly diagnosed, presumably localized epilepsy, choices may be made on the specific attributes of each antiepileptic drug (i.e., risk of teratogenicity of the antiepileptic drug during pregnancy), tolerability, and efficacy. Because of the risk for aortic or carotid dissection, it may also be wise to ensure good blood pressure control. Treatment of aortic/carotid dissection, congenital heart disease, and valvular disease is the same as in the general population. Many individuals with periventricular nodular heterotopia have dyslexia. Therefore, it may be prudent for those with a family history of PVNH to have children tested for dyslexia at an early age.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

 The secondary complications are those associated with prolonged seizure medication usage.

Surveillance

 Because of the associated increased incidence of aortic or carotid dissection in PVNH, affected individuals should be screened by echocardiogram and cardiac MRI. There is insufficient data at present to provide definitive guidelines. However, given that such complications have occurred in early adulthood, it is reasonable to perform evaluation initially in late adolescence, with follow up as needed. Cardiology evaluation of those who have connective tissue findings and classic PVNH would be prudent.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 Given the risk for vascular disease in neurologically asymptomatic individuals, it is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives. If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, head MRI can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

 Ideally, women should seek information prior to conception regarding risks to the fetus associated with taking an anti-seizure medication during pregnancy so that changes in the anti-seizure medication regimen (if needed) can be made prior to conception. If not done prior to conception, discussion of the risks and benefits of anti-seizure medication use during pregnancy should occur as soon as the pregnancy is recognized. The teratogenic risk to the fetus associated with the use of anti-seizure medication during pregnancy depends on the type of anti-seizure medication used, the dose, and the gestational age of the fetus. Currently no guidelines exist on the most appropriate surveillance for and management of cardiac, vascular, and connective tissue problems during pregnancy in women with PVNH. See Marfan Syndrome and Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome, Classic Type for possible pregnancy management recommendations.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Surgical resection has been attempted but has not proven beneficial [Li et al 1997].