http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/x-scid

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (X-SCID), the following evaluations are recommended: History, including family history, growth and development, and localized and generalized infectious processes (e.g., diarrhea, failure to thrive, pneumonia, sepsis, viral and fungal infections) CBC and differential count to document absolute lymphocyte count, if not performed in the diagnostic work up Flow cytometric determination of T-cell, B-cell, and NK-cell numbers, if not performed in the diagnostic work up In vitro mitogen assay of mononuclear cells (using PHA, ConA, or PWM) and soluble antigens (Candida antigen, tetanus toxoid). Rarely, pathogenic variants in the TCR pathway can alter the ability to proliferate after stimulation in response to anti-CD3 stimulation, despite normal numbers of T lymphocytes. Functional screening of STAT3 phosphorylation after IL-21 stimulation to test functionality of the common-gamma chain Consultation with a specialist in immunodeficiency Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

The current goals of treatment include prophylaxis for infections and preemptive bone marrow transplant (BMT) prior to the development of symptoms (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations). An individual diagnosed with X-SCID requires emergent treatment to provide a functional immune system. Interim management includes treatment of infections and use of immunoglobulin infusions and antibiotics, particularly prophylaxis against Pneumocystis jirovecii (formerly Pneumocystis carinii) and, in most cases, fungal infections. Isolation from exposure to CMV (breast milk, young children, blood products) is indicated.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT). Prompt immune reconstitution is required for survival of children with X-SCID [Myers et al 2002]. BMT was first successful in 1968 and remains the standard means of immune reconstitution. The general experience is that genotypically HLA-identical marrow transplantation restores T-cell immunity in more than 90% of unconditioned individuals with SCID, although B-cell reconstitution occurs in only a limited subset of these individuals [O'Reilly et al 1989, Buckley et al 1999]. Although many centers have expertise in performing bone marrow transplantation in individuals with malignancy, the special issues arising in bone marrow transplantation for X-SCID require involvement of immunodeficiency specialists for an optimal outcome. Individuals with SCID have no immune system capable of rejecting the graft and, therefore, do not typically require fully ablative conditioning; regimens that do not employ agents at doses resulting in long-lasting marrow aplasia are referred to as reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC) regimens. Additionally, protocols including alpha/beta T-cell depletion in graft preparations are now being used to improve unrelated donor graft outcomes. HLA-matched bone marrow transplantation from a relative is preferred; however, most individuals lack a matched, related donor. For infants who do not have a matched, related donor, haploidentical parental bone marrow that has been depleted of mature T cells can be used [Buckley et al 1999, Pai et al 2014]. In this technique, the bone marrow is depleted of T cells in order to remove mismatched T cells, which would react against the baby's tissues and cause graft versus host disease (GVHD). Matched, unrelated donor transplantation of peripherally harvested bone marrow (or less frequently cord blood hematopoietic stem cells) in association with partially myeloablative or RIC regimens is now being used at specialized transplantation centers, although GVHD can be a significant problem in some individuals. Mismatched T cells can react against the baby's tissues and cause GVHD. Cord blood from normal infants is now being banked; frozen cells can be thawed and used in other unrelated donor transplants. The best timing for BMT is immediately after birth because young infants are less likely than older infants to have had serious infections or failure to thrive. The Primary Immune Deficiency Treatment Consortium (PIDTC) found in 25 centers over the last decade significantly better outcomes (>90% survival) in children receiving transplantation in early infancy (age <3.5 months) without prior infections even after alternative donor grafts were used [Pai et al 2014]. Younger infants also have more rapid engraftment, fewer post-transplantation infections, less GVHD, and shorter hospitalizations than those in whom BMT is delayed [Kane et al 2001, Myers et al 2002]. The optimal age and RIC regimen in young infants, however, remains to be determined. BMT after age 3.5 months and/or a history of infections resulted in a dramatic decrease in survival post transplantation. Complications following BMT in some individuals include GVHD, failure to make adequate antibodies requiring long-term immunoglobulin replacement, late loss of T cells presumably due to failure to engraft hematopoietic stem cells, chronic warts, and lymphocyte dysregulation. Administration of immunoglobulin. Long-term periodic administration of immunoglobulin may be required in those who fail to develop allogeneic, functional B lymphocytes after transplantation. Gene therapy. Gene therapy has been evaluated in individuals not eligible for BMT, after failed BMT, and in individuals with only haploidentical donors. Gene therapy performed using autologous bone marrow stem/progenitor cells transduced with gamma-retroviral vectors expressing a therapeutic gene resulted in significant T-cell reconstitution in the majority of young infants with X-SCID, but only limited success in those with severe infections at the time of transplantation [reviewed in Fischer et al 2011, Hacein-Bey-Abina et al 2014]. B-cell reconstitution was less consistent with roughly half being able to discontinue gamma-globulin replacement therapy. Unfortunately, between two early trials, five of 20 individuals developed leukemia-like disease requiring ALL-type therapy due to retroviral insertional activation of cellular growth regulatory genes [Howe et al 2008, Hacein-Bey-Abina et al 2010, Deichmann et al 2011]. Newer, second-generation vectors utilizing self-inactivating (SIN) gamma-retroviral vectors have shown similar efficacy in T-cell reconstitution with improved safety design, no adverse events reported in nine individuals over three years post transplantation, and significantly fewer insertions found in genes implicated in lymphoproliferation [Hacein-Bey-Abina et al 2014]. Clinical trials using an SIN-lentiviral vector in conjunction with busulfan-based partial myeloablative conditioning are underway for both infants and older individuals who have failed BMT. Initial results in a small number of older individuals have demonstrated sustained myeloid viral marking and restoration of T, B, and NK cell numbers and function [Author, personal communication]. See also Therapies Under Investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

Complications following BMT in some individuals include GVHD, failure to make adequate antibodies requiring long-term immunoglobulin replacement, late loss of T cells (presumably due to failure to engraft hematopoietic stem cells), chronic warts, lymphocyte dysregulation, and rarely, malignancy. All individuals have some degree of immunodeficiency, especially during the first six to 12 months following transplantation. PJP, viral and encapsulated organism prophylaxis should be applied per transplantation protocols. IVIG prophylaxis should be considered to maintain serum IgG levels above 400mg/dL. Prompt evaluation of illness should occur until the individual is deemed immunologically competent. Individuals with primary immunodeficiency post transplantation will require bacteriophage testing off all immunosuppressive therapy to determine eligibility for re-vaccination. Only CMV-negative, irradiated blood products should be used. Avoid breast feeding and exposure to young children to prevent CMV transmission to babies with X-SCID.

Surveillance

After successful bone marrow transplantation, routine evaluation of affected boys every six to 12 months is appropriate to monitor donor cell engraftment, growth, immune and lung function, and gastrointestinal and dermatologic issues.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

The following should be avoided: Live vaccines. All immunizations should be deferred until after restoration of immunocompetence. Transfusion of non-irradiated blood products. Only CMV-negative, irradiated (1500 to 5000 RADS) blood products should be used. Breast-feeding and breast milk, until maternal CMV status is established by CMV DNA PCR testing of a blood sample. CMV is a chronic infection and intermittent viral shedding in various bodily fluids occurs unpredictably. If such testing is negative and the mother is CMV serology negative, breast milk may rarely be considered safe for feeding. Frequent retesting of breast milk is required given the risk of primary infection in the mother. Pasteurization of breast milk remains controversial in preparation for BMT given the severe negative consequences in BMT outcomes. Exposure to young children, sick contacts, or individuals with cold sores

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic at-risk male relatives of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the IL2RG pathogenic variant in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of treatment and preventive measures. When the pathogenic variant in the family is known, prenatal diagnosis of at-risk males allows preparation for bone marrow transplantation to be initiated before birth. Most couples at risk of having an affected male have desired prenatal testing to help prepare for optimal treatment of an affected newborn: bone marrow transplantation centers were chosen, HLA testing of family members and the prenatal sample was carried out, and a search for a marrow donor could be initiated [Puck et al 1997a]. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

The following investigations are underway: Second-generation gene replacement strategies based on self-inactivating (SIN) gamma-retroviral (RV) and lentiviral (LV) vectors lacking the LTR enhancers with high insertional genotoxicity are in early clinical development (see ClinicalTrials.gov), and similar strategies based on self-inactivating foamy viral vectors are in pre-clinical development. Multi-institutional Phase I/II trials using an SIN RV vector carrying the IL2Rgamma cDNA have recently completed enrollment for infants with X-SCID performed without conditioning. Using the same SIN RV vector, the NIH has enrolled older males with X-SCID who had prior transplantation but did not achieve satisfactory immune reconstitution for a clinical trial using reduced-intensity conditioning. St. Jude Children's Research Hospital and Seattle Children's Hospital are enrolling infants with X-SCID and the NIH is enrolling older males who had prior transplantation in SIN LV clinical trials using low dose busulfan conditioning. The PIDTC is developing a clinical trial assessing the impact of busulfan dose escalation in infants receiving marrow transplantation in classic SCID. This work may provide new information regarding optimal conditioning regimens for transplant and/or gene therapy. Thus, it is anticipated that over the next several years, gene transfer therapies with improved safety and efficacy profiles will become increasingly available. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.