

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with FRMD7-related infantile nystagmus (FIN), the following are recommended: Evaluation of visual acuity at different gaze positions [Yang et al 2005] Recording eye movements to evaluate the nystagmus waveform: Amplitude, frequency, and conjugacy Foveation dynamics Null point width determination In individuals with periodic alternating nystagmus, recording of cycle duration and the presence of an alternating head posture

Treatment of Manifestations

 
            Optical devices Correction of refractive errors as early as possible using contact lenses or appropriate refractive correction can improve visual acuity appreciably. Contact lenses not only provide optical correction but also may have a role in dampening the intensity of the nystagmus. Although the mechanism is not clear, it has been suggested that dampening of the nystagmus may be exerted through the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve, which is part of the proprioceptive pathway [Dell'Osso 2002]. The use of prisms may be helpful in individuals with binocular vision whose nystagmus is dampened by convergence. There are no fixed age groups for which prisms are prescribed; however, prisms are typically used in adults, teenagers, and cooperative children. Pharmacologic. Memantine and gabapentin have been reported to improve visual acuity, intensity of nystagmus, and foveation [Shery et al 2006, McLean et al 2007]. 
            Surgery The Anderson-Kestenbaum procedure consists of surgery of the extraocular muscles to shift the null zone to the primary position. As mentioned above, the cause of an anomalous head posture is an eccentric null zone. Therefore, shifting the null zone also corrects the anomalous head posture. In practice this procedure not only shifts but also broadens the null zone, as well as decreasing nystagmus outside the null zone. Abnormal head posture is only seen in approximately 15% of affected individuals. Clinical trials to assess the role of horizontal rectus tenotomy and its effects on visual function found an improvement in nystagmus waveform and visual function [Hertle et al 2003].

Surveillance

 Regular follow up, especially during childhood, is necessary to evaluate for development of vision, refractive errors, strabismus, and/or ambylopia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.