

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with the int22h1/int22h2-mediated Xq28 duplication syndrome, the following evaluations are recommended: Review of medical history for behavioral and psychiatric problems, recurrent infections, and atopic diseases Comprehensive physical examination with emphasis on growth parameters, hands and feet, and possible kyphoscoliosis Neuropsychological evaluation to assess level of cognitive functioning and for any behavioral problems Psychiatric evaluation if psychiatric illness is suspected Echocardiogram Audiologic evaluation Ophthalmologic examination Spine x-ray and orthopedic evaluation if kyphoscoliosis is present Nutritional evaluation and counseling if obesity is present Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations

 Early intervention with speech and physical therapy is recommended for young children with developmental delay. Special education programs are subsequently recommended for school-aged children with intellectual disability. Recurrent bacterial infections are treated with standard antibiotics. Children with recurrent ear infections should be referred to ENT to assess need for tympanostomy tubes. Nutritional counseling and regular exercise are needed when obesity is an issue. Standard management is recommended for the following: Behavioral and psychiatric problems Kyphoscoliosis Cardiac malformations Hearing impairment Eye problems

Surveillance

 The following routine monitoring is recommended: Assessment of developmental progress and cognitive abilities Screening for behavioral and psychiatric problems Audiology evaluation Ophthalmologic evaluation

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic children who are relatives of an affected individual by genomic testing for the int22h1/int22h2-mediated Xq28 duplication. Clinically asymptomatic children who have the familial duplication should be assessed and monitored for developmental delay with the goal of early initiation of therapies and support if needed. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.