http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/xxms

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a 46,XX testicular disorder of sex development (46,XX testicular DSD), the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment of mood, libido, energy, erectile function, acne, and breast tenderness and size by history and/or physical examination Dexascan to evaluate for osteopenia Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations

 Testosterone-replacement therapy. Management of individuals with 46,XX testicular DSD with testosterone deficiency is similar to that for other causes of testosterone deficiency. Physicians should check for the most current preparations and dosage recommendations before initiating testosterone replacement therapy. After age 14 years, low-dose testosterone therapy can be initiated. Note: If an individual has short stature and is eligible for growth hormone therapy, testosterone therapy should be either delayed or given at lower doses initially in order to maximize growth potential. Testosterone enanthate is given IM every three to four weeks, starting at 100 mg and increasing by 50 mg every six months to 200-400 mg. Initial high doses of testosterone should be avoided to prevent priapism. The treatment should plateau, in adulthood, at the best possible dosage, typically between 50 and 400 mg every two to four weeks. Injection of testosterone enanthate is the preferred method of replacement therapy because of low cost and easy, at-home regulation of dosage; however, side effects include pain associated with injection and large variations of serum testosterone concentration between injections, resulting in a higher risk of mood swings. Alternative delivery systems that result in a more stable dosing include transdermal patches (scrotal and non-scrotal) and transdermal gels. Testosterone-containing gels, however, are associated with the risk of interpersonal transfer, which can be reduced by the use of newer hydroalcoholic gels [Kühnert et al 2005]. Gynecomastia. Regression of gynecomastia may occur with testosterone replacement therapy. If it does not, and if it causes psychological distress to the individual, reduction mammoplasty can be offered. Osteopenia. Depending on the degree of osteopenia, treatment may include: calcium, exercise, vitamin D, biphosphonates, or calcitonin. Referral to an internist, pediatrician, or endocrinologist is recommended. Psychological support.
Sensitivity is necessary when conveying information to individuals with 46,XX testicular DSD about the genetic cause and associated sterility of the disorder. This information must be presented in a manner that helps minimize psychological distress. Providers are encouraged to anticipate the need for further psychological assistance.

Surveillance

 Monitoring during testosterone replacement therapy should include the following: Evaluation of mood, libido, energy, erectile function, acne, and breast tenderness and size. Measurement of serum testosterone concentration at three-month intervals (prior to the next injection) to evaluate nadir testosterone concentrations. Concentrations lower than 200 ng/dL or higher than 500 ng/dL may require adjustment of total dose or frequency. In adults, digital rectal examination and measurement of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) prior to treatment and three, six, and 12 months after initiation of therapy to evaluate for the presence of an overt prostate cancer, which would be a contraindication to the treatment. Such testing should then be performed annually. For individuals on testosterone replacement therapy, evaluation of hematocrit at three, six, and 12 months, then annually because of risk of increased hematocrit with subsequent risk of hypoxia and sleep apnea Lipid profile and liver function tests, as testosterone may alter lipid profile and liver function Bone mineral determination by bone densitometry (DEXA) once a year, if osteopenia has been diagnosed Ongoing psychosocial support

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

 Contraindications to testosterone replacement therapy include prostate cancer (known or suspected) and breast cancer. Oral androgens such as methyltestosterone and fluoxymesterone should not be given (especially for long-term therapy) because of liver toxicity.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.