

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

 To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Y chromosome infertility, semen analysis to determine the number, motility, and morphology of sperm is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations

 A couple in which the male has Y chromosome infertility can be offered the option of in vitro fertilization using ICSI (intracytoplasmic sperm injection) [Silber 2011]. In this procedure, spermatozoa retrieved from ejaculate (in males with oligozoospermia) or extracted from testicular biopsies (in males with azoospermia) are injected into a harvested egg by IVF (in vitro fertilization). Retrieval of sperm has been successful mainly for most males with deletions of AZFc, and rarely for males with deletions of AZFb or AZFa. The reason for this is that an autosomal copy of DAZ (DAZL) may serve as a “back up gene,” which would help preserve a tiny amount of residual spermatogenesis in males with AZFc deletions that remove the DAZ genes. There are no such autosomal “back up” copies for genes in AZFa and AZFb. The definition of SCOS (Sertoli cell only syndrome) has been the subject of confusion in the literature. There are two main causes of non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA): maturation arrest and Sertoli cell only. With maturation arrest, there is a failure of spermatocytes to progress beyond meiosis I. But in 60% of cases, a few spermatocytes do progress to sperm and can be retrieved from the testis. Similarly, in about 60% of cases with SCOS a tiny number of tubules actually contain a few spermatozoa resulting from small foci of spermatogenesis. It is important to discuss the possibility of transmission of Y chromosome infertility to male offspring (see Genetic Counseling) prior to attempting fertilization by ICSI and IVF [Stouffs et al 2005]. In males with retrievable spermatozoa, the presence or absence of deletion of the long arm of the Y chromosome has no apparent effect on fertilization or pregnancy rates [Oates et al 2002, Kihaile et al 2004, Silber 2011]. The risk for birth defects is not different from that of any infertile couple who achieves a pregnancy through assisted reproductive technology [Choi et al 2004, Davies et al 2012].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

 See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation

 Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other

 Testicular sperm retrieval for in vitro fertilization is ineffective for males with AZFb and AZFa deletions, but has been achieved for the majority of males with AZFc deletions [Oates et al 2002, Stouffs et al 2005, Reyes-Vallejo et al 2006, Silber 2011].