http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/zap70-scid

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis

The care of individuals diagnosed with ZAP70-related CID is best managed with a multidisciplinary team of providers including hematology/oncology/bone marrow transplantation, immunology, genetics, and infectious disease specialists. To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ZAP70-related combined immunodeficiency (CID), the following evaluations are recommended: Assessment of growth Evaluation for common and opportunistic viral, bacterial, and fungal disease-causing agents Complete metabolic panel (liver and renal function), complete blood count (CBC) with differential and platelet count, lymphocyte subsets and mitogen proliferation, and quantitative immunoglobulins Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor Consultation with a clinical immunologist Consultation for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation

Treatment of Manifestations

Treatment relies on prompt reconstitution of the individual’s immune system (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations). Supportive treatment includes IVIG and antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, and Pneumocystis jiroveci prophylaxis to control and reduce the occurrence of infections.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations

The only curative therapy for ZAP70-related CID is allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Extrapolated data show that the outcome of HSCT in children with SCID is significantly improved by performing HSCT prior to the onset of infections [Pai et al 2014]. Children with ZAP70-related CID have been successfully transplanted using a variety of donors including haploidentical donors and unrelated umbilical cord blood [Noraz et al 2000, Elder et al 2001, Hönig et al 2012, Cuvelier et al 2016]. Outcomes are the best with HLA-matched, related donors. If an HLA-matched, related donor is not available, alternatives include: Matched unrelated donor; Umbilical cord blood donor; Haploidentical parental bone marrow or mobilized peripheral blood stem cells that have been T-cell depleted. In contrast to individuals with SCID, individuals with ZAP70-related CID are typically treated with a chemotherapeutic conditioning regimen prior to HSCT, although some individuals have received unconditioned transplants with variable success, suggesting that conditioning may not be essential in some circumstances [Hönig et al 2012, Kim et al 2013, Cuvelier et al 2016]. The largest series of eight individuals with ZAP70-related CID who received HSCT using a variety of stem cell sources showed the following: All individuals were alive at a median of 13.5 years of follow up. Two-thirds of the individuals who did not receive conditioning failed to have myeloid engraftment but have maintained stable mixed chimerism. In addition, three individuals who received stem cells from a matched sib did not receive conditioning prior to transplant and achieved engraftment. 75% of individuals developed acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and 50% developed chronic GVHD. Seven of eight individuals achieved freedom from IVIG and show evidence of class switching with resolution of dysregulated immunoglobulin production and six of the eight show evidence of antibody production to both protein and polysaccharide vaccines. Two individuals receiving myeloablative conditioning have developed premature ovarian failure. Cellular reconstitution following HSCT takes up to one year, while restoration of humoral immunity can take significantly longer, and may not occur in some individuals. Complications from HSCT include graft-versus-host disease, failure to reconstitute the humoral immune compartment, graft failure over time, and post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease [Skoda-Smith et al 2001, Dvorak & Cowan 2008, Pai et al 2014]. Affected individuals with poor humoral reconstitution are maintained on long-term immunoglobulin replacement. Individuals who do not undergo HSCT require close monitoring for worsening of immune function manifested by increased susceptibility to severe or opportunistic infections (see also Surveillance). If clinical status worsens, rapid transition to HSCT should be considered.

Prevention of Secondary Complications

The following are appropriate: Use of irradiated, leukoreduced, cytomegalovirus (CMV)-safe blood products Delay of immunizations until immune reconstitution Consideration for formula feeds in place of breast feeding until CMV status of mother is known. Caution should be taken to assess the quality of the water source for the infant formula.

Surveillance

Following a successful HSCT, the following should be routinely monitored: Growth Psychomotor development Complete blood counts Liver and renal function Immune status Donor and recipient chimerism Development of post-transplant complications, particularly chronic graft-versus-host disease, decreased bone density, pulmonary and cardiac function, and gonadal function Individuals with milder findings or those who have not undergone HSCT also need to be monitored for worsening of immune function with periodic assessment of clinical status and functional lymphocyte responsiveness.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid

Individuals with ZAP70-related CID should avoid the following: Non-irradiated blood products Live virus vaccinations Mycobacterium bovis (BCG) vaccine against tuberculosis, Salmonella typhi (Ty21a) vaccine against typhoid fever, and Vibrio cholerae (CVD 103-HgR) vaccine against cholera, which may be part of the routine vaccination schedule in countries where these diseases are endemic Contaminated water sources Exposure to fungus-enriched environments (e.g., construction sites, agricultural areas with active soil disruption, mulch, hay)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk

Because the outcome of HSCT in children with ZAP70-related CID is significantly improved by performing HSCT prior to the onset of severe infections, early testing of at-risk sibs should be considered. In addition, any sibs considered as bone marrow donors must be evaluated for ZAP70-related CID prior to donation. If the ZAP70 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs. If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known, CBC, quantitative immunoglobulins, and lymphocyte subsets and proliferation can be used to clarify the genetic status (immunologic status) of at-risk sibs. See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management

Appropriately screened blood products should be available, if needed, during the course of the pregnancy and delivery.

Therapies Under Investigation

Gene therapy. Gene therapy has not been performed in ZAP70-related CID. Experimental studies utilizing gene therapy have been conducted on murine models [Adjali et al 2005, Irla et al 2008] as well as human cells in vitro [Steinberg et al 2000, Kofler et al 2004, Gavino et al 2017]. Nonviral transfer methods (e.g., electro-gene transfer) have also been used to correct ZAP-70 deficiency in a murine model [Irla et al 2008]. Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.