http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/aprt-def

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with APRT deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment of kidney involvement:

Measure serum creatinine concentration.

Screen for albuminuria or proteinuria.

Assess kidney stone burden with ultrasound or CT examination.

Perform kidney biopsy in individuals with reduced renal function and/or proteinuria.

Ophthalmology consultation if eye symptoms are present

Consideration of consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Allopurinol. Treatment with the XDH inhibitor allopurinol is effective and generally well-tolerated in individuals with APRT deficiency. Allopurinol 5-10 mg/kg/day (maximum daily dose 800 mg), either once daily or in two divided doses, minimizes DHA crystalluria, stone formation, crystal deposition in the kidney, and the development of kidney failure [Edvardsson et al 2001, Bollée et al 2010]. Treatment with allopurinol can even dissolve DHA kidney stones and improve kidney function in individuals with advanced CKD [Edvardsson et al 2001, Bollée et al 2010]. Allopurinol treatment is monitored by clinical evaluation and urine microscopy; the absence of urinary DHA crystals is indicative of adequate therapy.

Febuxostat. The recently introduced XDH inhibitor febuxostat provides an alternative treatment option for affected individuals allergic to or intolerant of allopurinol [Becker et al 2005]. The complete disappearance of urinary DHA crystals was recently described in an indvidual with APRT deficiency treated with febuxostat in the daily dose of 80 mg [Arnadóttir 2014]. Furthermore, the authors of this review have noted a significant reduction or even disappearance of DHA crystalluria in several adult individuals with APRT deficiency treated with a daily febuxostat dose of 80 mg [unpublished observations].

Low purine diet and ample fluid intake provide adjunctive benefits to pharmacologic therapy.

Surgical management of DHA kidney stones is the same as for the management of other types of stones, including extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy.


Treatment of ESRD

Dialysis. Of note, it is not known if individuals with APRT deficiency on dialysis benefit from allopurinol therapy. The allopurinol dose should not routinely be reduced in affected individuals who have impaired kidney function.

Kidney transplantation. All individuals with APRT deficiency undergoing kidney transplantation require treatment with allopurinol (or febuxostat) for at least six weeks prior to transplant surgery, whenever possible. Affected individuals who have undergone kidney transplantation require lifelong therapy with allopurinol (or febuxostat) to prevent recurrent DHA crystal nephropathy in the transplanted organ.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Adequate treatment of APRT deficiency with allopurinol (or febuxostat in those who are allergic to or intolerant of allopurinol) prevents kidney stone formation and the development of CKD in most, if not all, individuals with the disorder [Edvardsson et al 2001, Bollée et al 2010, Harambat et al 2012]. Therefore, all affected individuals should receive lifelong treatment with allopurinol (or febuxostat).

Surveillance



No surveillance guidelines have been developed. However, all individuals with APRT deficiency should see their physician every six to 12 months to:

Monitor kidney function;

Assess the urinary excretion of DHA crystals (disappearance of the crystals is considered an adequate treatment response);

Facilitate medication compliance.

Periodic renal ultrasound examinations may be considered to evaluate for new kidney stones.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Azathioprine should be avoided by individuals taking XDH inhibitors.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Once the pathogenic variants in a family have been identified, it is recommended that sibs of an affected individual undergo molecular genetic testing or APRT enzyme activity measurements to allow early diagnosis and treatment in order to improve long-term outcome. Further investigations, including assessment of renal function and urinalysis, are warranted in individuals with biallelic pathogenic variants.

Note: Approximately 15% of individuals with APRT deficiency may be asymptomatic [Edvardsson et al 2001, Bollée et al 2010]; they are usually identified during family screening.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



The safety of allopurinol in human pregnancy has not been systematically studied.

Animal studies using high doses of allopurinol have revealed evidence of adverse fetal effects in mice but not in rats or rabbits; it is not clear if these effects are a result of direct fetal toxicity or maternal toxicity. Thus, allopurinol should only be prescribed during pregnancy when the benefit of treatment is believed to outweigh the risk. Treatment with allopurinol during pregnancy should be considered in women with APRT deficiency who have CKD with reduced glomerular filtration rate (GFR) or who have undergone kidney transplantation.

Some post-transplantation immunosuppressive therapies can also have adverse effects on the developing fetus.

A thorough discussion of the risks and benefits of maternal medication use during pregnancy should ideally take place with an appropriate health care provider prior to conception.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.