http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/bfns

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



KCNQ2-related disorders represent a broad prognostic spectrum, and evaluation following a positive KCNQ2 genetic test differs depending on severity of the phenotype.


Individuals with benign familial neonatal epilepsy (BFNE)

In-depth neurologic examination

Developmental evaluation


Individuals with neonatal epileptic encephalopathy (NEE)

Video EEG monitoring including sleep phase to obtain information on presence of seizures. A burst suppression EEG pattern might only be seen during sleep.

Cognitive and behavioral neuropsychological testing

Assessment of digestive and other non-neurologic comorbidities

All individuals with a KCNQ2-related disorder. Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor is also recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations



KCNQ2-BFNE. Seizures in individuals with BFNE are generally controlled with conventional antiepileptic treatment. Phenobarbital and phenytoin (loading doses of 15-20 mg/kg; maintenance doses of 3-4 mg/kg for both agents) [Painter et al 1981] are the antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) most commonly used to treat neonatal seizures.

Because of concerns over the suboptimal effectiveness and safety of phenytoin and phenobarbital, other anticonvulsants, such as levetiracetam and topiramate, are often used (off-label and despite limited data) in neonates with refractory seizures [Tulloch et al 2012]. Refractory seizures are uncommon in KCNQ2-related BFNE.

KCNQ2-NEE. Children with KCNQ2-related neonatal epileptic encephalopathy generally present with tonic seizures accompanied by motor and autonomic features, similar to seizures in KCNQ2-BFNE. However, individuals with KCNQ2-NEE clearly differ from those with KCNQ2-BFNE as to seizure response. Although seizure response to any of the AEDs has been described in isolated patients, many patients at onset show multiple daily seizures resistant to multiple common old- and new-generation AEDs, alone or in combination. Seizures then tend to gradually decrease by age nine months to four years [Weckhuysen et al 2012].

A favorable response to drugs acting on voltage-gated sodium channels has been suggested in several studies [Kato et al 2013, Weckhuysen et al 2013, Numis et al 2014, Pisano et al 2015]. It has been suggested that early effective treatment reduces cognitive disability [Pisano et al 2015]; however, it remains a matter of debate whether early control of seizures translates to better neuropsychological outcome.

VGB or ACTH therapy can be tried for treatment of infantile spasms that can occur during the course of the disease [Dedek et al 2003, Borgatti et al 2004, Serino et al 2013].

Management should further focus on the optimization of the patient’s functional and communication skills. A multidisciplinary team approach including physiotherapists, speech therapists, and behavioral therapists is best suited to addressing the individual’s needs. Augmentative communication techniques can be valuable for many patients.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



As seizure frequency tends to decrease with age, the option to taper and eventually stop AED after a sufficient seizure-free period should be considered in order to prevent complications of long-term AED use. Some children may require lifelong antiepileptic treatment.

Surveillance



KCNQ2-BFNE. EEG at age three, 12, and 24 months is appropriate. The EEG at 24 months should be normal.

KCNQ2-NEE. Video-EEG monitoring is appropriate when new or different seizure types are suspected.

Serial neuropsychological evaluation of neurologic, cognitive, and behavioral problems is advised.

Regular follow up by a multidisciplinary team with particular attention to nutritional intake, gastrointestinal function, mobility and communication skills is recommended.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



In patients with known gain-of-function pathogenic variants in KCNQ2, the use of the potassium channel opener retigabine/ezogabine may be contraindicated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



The pregnancy management of a woman with a KCNQ2 pathogenic variant and epilepsy does not differ from that of any other pregnant woman with a seizure disorder.

A fetus with a KCNQ2 pathogenic variant may have neonatal seizures in the first few days of life. Therefore, a woman who is carrying a fetus at risk of inheriting a KCNQ2-related disorder should consider delivering in a hospital with a neonatal intensive care unit.

Therapies Under Investigation



A recent report described a positive effect of vitamin B6 on seizures in a few patients with KCNQ2-NEE [Reid et al 2016], but further studies are needed to confirm the antiepileptic effect of pyridoxine in the absence of an inherited disorder of vitamin B6 metabolism.

The selective neuronal KCNQ potassium channel opener retigabine/ezogabine, an AED introduced in 2013 as adjunctive treatment of partial epilepsy in adults [Porter et al 2012], may represent a targeted therapy for KCNQ2-NEE. However, the discovery of additional side-effects in the early post-marketing (blue discoloration of skin and retina) raise concerns about its use in children. Although a good effect on seizures was described in one patient [Weckhuysen et al 2013], additional experience has not yet been reported. Furthermore, given existing in vitro evidence that some variants may lead to a gain of function, the use of retigabine/ezogabine may theoretically even be contraindicated in some patients. Further studies are needed to address whether early use of the drug in specific patient groups is effective.

Search Clinical Trials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.