http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/bws

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Assessment for airway sufficiency in the presence of macroglossia

Evaluation by a feeding specialist if macroglossia causes significant feeding difficulties

Assessment of neonates for hypoglycemia; evaluation by a pediatric endocrinologist if hypoglycemia persists beyond the first few days of life.

Abdominal ultrasound examination to assess for organomegaly, structural abnormality, and tumors

Comprehensive cardiac evaluation including ECG and echocardiogram prior to surgical procedures or when a cardiac abnormality is suspected on clinical evaluation

Alpha-fetoprotein assay at the time of initial diagnosis to evaluate for hepatoblastoma. It is important to utilize normal ranges for specific age categories to guide result interpretation, especially in very young infants.

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



The following are appropriate:

Prompt treatment of hypoglycemia to reduce the risk of central nervous system complications. Because onset of hypoglycemia is occasionally delayed for several days, or even months, parents should be informed of the symptoms of hypoglycemia so that they can seek appropriate medical attention.

Abdominal wall repair for omphalocele soon after birth. Generally, this surgery is well tolerated.

Management of difficulties arising from macroglossia:

Anticipation of difficulties with endotracheal intubation [Kimura et al 2008]

Assessment of respiratory function, possibly including sleep study to address concern regarding potential sleep apnea

Management of feeding difficulties using specialized nipples such as the longer nipple recommended for babies with cleft palate or, rarely, short-term use of nasogastric tube feedings

Follow up by a craniofacial team including plastic surgeons, orthodontists, and speech pathologists familiar with the natural history of BWS. Tongue growth does slow over time and jaw growth can accelerate to accommodate the enlarged tongue. Some children benefit from tongue reduction surgery; however, surgical reduction typically affects tongue length but not thickness; residual cosmetic and speech issues may require further assessment/treatment [Tomlinson et al 2007].

Orthodontic intervention as needed in later childhood/adolescence

Assessment of speech difficulties

Management of cleft palate following standard protocols

Referral to a craniofacial surgeon if facial hemihyperplasia is significant

Consultation with an orthopedic surgeon if hemihyperplasia results in a significant difference in leg length. Surgery may be necessary during early puberty to close the growth plate of the longer leg in order to equalize the final leg lengths.

Treatment of neoplasias following standard pediatric oncology protocols

In some individuals with BWS, developmental anomalies of the renal tract are associated with increased calcium excretion and deposition (i.e., nephrocalcinosis). In individuals with evidence of calcium deposits on renal ultrasound examination, assessment for hypercalciuria and a CT scan of the kidneys may be helpful.

Referral to a pediatric nephrologist if urinary calcium is elevated and/or a structural renal anomaly is identified

Referral of children with structural GI tract abnormalities to the relevant specialist

Management of cardiac problems following standard protocols

Standard interventions such as infant stimulation programs, occupational and physical therapy, and individualized education programs for children with developmental delay

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Prompt evaluation and standard treatment for suspected urinary tract infections is appropriate to prevent secondary renal damage.

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

Monitoring for hypoglycemia, especially in the neonatal period

Screening for embryonal tumors, which has traditionally involved the following(see also Note):

Abdominal ultrasound examination every three months until age eight years [Beckwith 1998, Tan & Amor 2006, Clericuzio & Martin 2009, Zarate et al 2009]

Measurement of serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) concentration every two to three months in the first four years of life for early detection of hepatoblastoma [Clericuzio & Martin 2009]. AFP serum concentration may be elevated in children with BWS in the first year of life [Everman et al 2000]. If the AFP is elevated and imaging reveals no suspicious lesion, follow-up measurement of serum AFP concentration plus baseline liver function tests one month later can be used to determine the trend in serum AFP concentrations over time. If the concentration is not decreasing, it is appropriate to undertake an exhaustive search for an underlying tumor [Clericuzio et al 2003]. Note: (1) Some have proposed revising the tumor surveillance guidelines based on the molecular alteration detected. Scott et al [2006] suggested that children with BWS and IC2 alterations did not require Wilms tumor screening. Brioude et al [2013] proposed that children with BWS and loss of methylation at IC2 should have an ultrasound evaluation at the time of clinical diagnosis and only continue with ultrasound surveillance if visceromegaly or ‘severe’ hemihyperplasia are present; otherwise, clinical examination alone was recommended. Mussa et al [2016b] questioned the rationale for ultrasound surveillance and ‘tumor markers’ for individuals with loss of methylation at IC2 but subsequently, in their guidelines from the Italian Scientific Committee on BWS, suggested that in the near future, tumor screening in clinical practice will cease. Based on personal experience, the present authors continue to recommend tumor surveillance for all children with BWS regardless of the molecular etiology. (2) Although periodic chest x-ray and urinary VMA and VHA assays to screen for neuroblastoma have been suggested, they have not been incorporated into most screening protocols because of their low yield.

Annual renal ultrasound examination between age eight years and mid-adolescence to identify those requiring further evaluation for findings such as nephrocalcinosis and medullary sponge kidney disease. Those with positive findings should be referred to a nephrologist for further assessment and follow up. Since the natural history of renal disease in adults has not as yet been evaluated, adult-onset renal disease without early findings remains a possibility. Therefore, consideration should be given to periodic renal evaluation in adulthood.

Consideration of annual or biannual measurement of urinary calcium/creatinine ratio from the time of BWS diagnosis as it may be abnormal in individuals with BWS who have normal findings on ultrasound examination [Goldman et al 2003]

Developmental screening as part of routine childcare

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate the newborn sib of an individual with BWS in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of preventive measures.

Evaluations can include:

Genetic testing if a maternal CDKN1C pathogenic variant or familial duplication, deletion, or cytogenetically visible alteration of 11p15 is known;

Monitoring of an at-risk newborn sib for hypoglycemia, even in the absence of obvious clinical findings on prenatal investigation;

Strong consideration of tumor surveillance for the apparently unaffected twin of monozygotic twins who are discordant for BWS, given the possibility of shared fetal circulation and resulting somatic mosaicism.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.