http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/ccfdn

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with congenital cataracts, facial dysmorphism, and neuropathy (CCFDN) and to address the most disabling manifestations, the following evaluations are recommended:

Visual impairment (ophthalmologic examination)

Peripheral neuropathy and ensuing physical handicap (neurologic and orthopedic examinations, measurements of nerve conduction velocity)

Endocrinologic evaluation, related to growth delay, fertility problems, and osteopenia

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



The treatment of cataracts is surgical. The surgical removal of cataracts may be complicated by the micropupils and fibrotic pupillary margins necessitating alternative mechanical methods of dilatation [Müllner-Eidenböck et al 2004].

Patients need close follow up because of unusually exaggerated postoperative inflammatory reactions and strong unspecific foreign-body reaction to contact lenses and intraocular lenses (intraocular lenses are generally better tolerated) [Müllner-Eidenböck et al 2004].

The management of the peripheral neuropathy includes rehabilitation and corrective surgery for the secondary bone deformities.

Hormone replacement therapy may be considered in young females with secondary amenorrhea and increased risk of osteoporosis. Regular rehabilitation can prevent or postpone osteoporosis.

Growth hormone levels in CCFDN are in low normal range and somatotropin hormone substitution is not expected to have considerable effect.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Individuals with CCFDN are prone to develop severe and potentially life-threatening complications related to anesthesia, such as pulmonary edema, inspiratory stridor, malignant hyperthermia, and epileptic seizures [Müllner-Eidenböck et al 2004] and thus need close monitoring and possibly intensive postoperative care.

Affected individuals and care providers need to be aware of rhabdomyolysis as a potential complication following viral infections, and seek medical attention with the first recognizable symptoms. Oral corticosteroid treatment for two to three weeks can result in a full recovery within two to six months [Walter et al 2014]. The long-term outcome depends on the recurrence of rhabdomyolysis episodes [Walter et al 2014].

Surveillance



Annual examinations to monitor for possible ophthalmologic, neurologic, and endocrine complications are warranted.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



General anesthesia in patients with CCFDN may cause complications such as pulmonary edema, inspiratory stridor, malignant hyperthermia, and epileptic seizures [Müllner-Eidenböck et al 2004]. Although such complications have not been unequivocally documented, Masters et al [2017] recommend cautious use of general anesthesia until more information on related risks is available.

Prolonged exercise was reported to provoke myalgia in one patient with CCFDN [Merlini et al 2002].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the CTDP1 pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

If the pathogenic variants in the family are not known careful monitoring of at-risk sibs for the early disease manifestations (ocular, delayed motor milestones, early signs of peripheral neuropathy) will ensure timely diagnosis of those affected.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Experience is very limited, as only three females with CCFDN are known to have given birth [Tournev et al 2001, Walter et al 2014]. The pregnancies are reported as uneventful and were carried to term. Normal pregnancy and delivery have also been reported by mothers of children with CCFDN.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.