http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/chchd10-dis

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with a CHCHD10-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

A structured general medical history and family history

Physical examination and neurologic examination

EMG/NCS to document the regions of involvement and indicate lower motor neuron and/or myopathic involvement

Evaluation of the extent and profile of cognitive disturbance by neuropsychological examination

Neuroimaging with MRI if not done at time of initial diagnosis.

Pulmonary function testing to detect and stage respiratory involvement

Speech and swallowing evaluation if dysarthria and/or dysphagia are present to direct care to minimize risk of aspiration and to initiate augmentative communication strategies for possible loss of verbal communication

Audiologic examination, including auditory brain stem responses (ABRs) and evoked otoacoustic emissions

Physical and occupational therapy evaluation to determine the adaptive devices needed to maximize function

Nutritional evaluation

Screening to detect depression and assess need for psychosocial support

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations




General

Adequate nutrition and weight maintenance are essential. Percutaneous gastrostomy is often appropriate to maintain adequate caloric intake in persons with significant bulbar involvement.

Joint contractures can occur, are often painful, and can interfere with care-giving. Appropriate bracing and stretching can minimize contractures.


Mitochondrial myopathy

Assistance with ambulation and posture

Surgical correction of ptosis as needed

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS). The management of CHCHD10-related ALS is identical to that of ALS due to other causes, and is outlined in the American Academy of Neurology practice parameter on this topic [Miller et al 1999].

Spasticity can be treated with a spasmolytic such as baclofen or a benzodiazepine.

Pseudobulbar affect can be treated with a tricyclic antidepressant or combination of quinidine and dextromethorphan.

Sialorrhea is often managed with anticholinergic medications (tricyclic antidepressants, scopolamine, atropine drops) or botulinum toxin injection of the salivary glands.

Antidepressants are often required to treat concurrent depression.

Riluzole is the only FDA-approved treatment for any type of ALS. Although there are no efficacy data specifically for CHCHD10-related ALS, strong consideration should be given to its use.

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Treatment follows routine practices.

Sedative or antipsychotic drugs help to reduce extreme restlessness, roaming behavior, delusions, and hallucinations.

The extrapyramidal signs are usually unresponsive or only partially responsive to L-dopa treatment.

Behavioral changes and the loss of insight and judgment in individuals with FTD often present a considerable burden for partners or other caregivers. Information about the disease and psychological support for partners or other caregivers is essential.

Spinal motor neuronopathy. The management of SMAJ is identical to that of adult-onset SMA due to other causes.

Surveillance



The following regular evaluations are indicated to detect manifestations that can occur with time:

Neurologic deficits. Neurologic examination including assessment of memory, personality changes

Psychiatric abnormalities. Assessment for signs including depression and suicidal ideation

Impaired respiratory function. Monitoring of forced vital capacity (FEV) and other aspects of respiratory function performed at clinic visits to determine the appropriate time to offer noninvasive ventilation

Sensorineural hearing loss. Audiologic examination including speech discrimination testing

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



The following should be noted:

Baclofen used to treat spasticity can sometimes worsen muscle weakness.

Some drugs used to treat the behavioral manifestations of FTD may worsen dysarthria, dysphagia, and/or respiratory weakness.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



A clinical trial with the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) paroxetine showed an increase in cognitive impairment in patients with FTD treated with this drug [Deakin et al 2004]. Conversely, a previous study with another SSRI, trazodone, showed a favorable effect on behavioral disturbances and agitation without cognitive decline [Lebert et al 2004]. Further studies are needed to clarify this issue.

Several trials with memantine are underway in patients with FTD, as well as a trial with oxytocin and its effect on social cognition.

Although no current clinical trials are specifically designed to target CHCHD10-related disorders, many are addressed in the broader category of ALS or FTD.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.