http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cmt-dib

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with DNM2-related intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy (DI-CMTB), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neurologic examination

Electrophysiologic studies to establish a baseline for further monitoring of disease progression

Complete blood count (CBC) with absolute neutrophil count (ANC) to evaluate for neutropenia

Ophthalmologic examination for cataract

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment of DI-CMTB is symptomatic and involves evaluation and management by a multidisciplinary team that includes neurologists, orthopedic surgeons, and physical and occupational therapists. Due to the great phenotypic variability, disease treatment should be tailored to the individual’s needs.

Treatment may include:

Ankle/foot orthoses

Orthopedic surgery

Forearm crutches or canes; rarely, wheelchairs

Treatment of musculoskeletal pain with acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs)

Career and employment counseling

Prevention of Secondary Complications



The most common secondary complications include foot contractures and acquired foot deformities, difficulty walking, and, in severe cases, inability to ambulate. Physical therapies such as stretching and exercise are recommended to prevent these secondary complications.

Surveillance



Surveillance includes regular evaluation by the multidisciplinary team to determine neurologic status and functional disability.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Although no systemic studies have been done concerning pregnancy in women with DI-CMTB, there are reports of an increased occurrence of abnormal fetal presentation and maternal postpartum bleeding in women with CMT in general [Hoff et al 2005]. The early miscarriage rate is not increased in women with CMT [Argov & de Visser 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.