http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/cmt4j

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 4J (CMT4J), the following evaluations are recommended:

Pulmonary function tests to determine whether respiratory functions are compromised

Skeletal survey to determine if any of the skeletal abnormalities typically observed in Yunis-Varón syndrome (YVS) are evident. Non-neural deficits are often severe and overshadow neurologic symptoms. Thus far, no neuromuscular involvement has been identified in persons with YVS.

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



No specific treatment reverses the manifestations of CMT4J.

Affected individuals are often managed by a multidisciplinary team that includes a neurologist, physiatrist, orthopedic surgeon, and physical and occupational therapists [Carter et al 1995, Pareyson & Marchesi 2009, Reilly & Shy 2009].

Treatment is symptomatic and may include the following:

Special shoes, including those with good ankle support

Ankle/foot orthoses to correct foot drop and aid walking [Carter et al 1995]

Orthopedic surgery to correct severe pes cavus deformity [Guyton & Mann 2000, Ward et al 2008]

Forearm crutches or canes for gait stability; severely affected individuals need wheelchairs.

Exercise within the individual's capability to remain physically active

BIPAP for those with respiratory muscle weakness

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Ankle braces can help prevent tripping and falling or ankle injuries.

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

Annual follow up with a neurologist for overall evaluation of neurologic deficits

Annual follow up with occupational therapy (OT) and physical therapy (PT) to assess fine motor and gross motor function

Annual follow up with a pulmonologist for evaluation of respiratory function

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Medications that are toxic or potentially toxic to persons with CMT comprise a spectrum of risk ranging from definite high risk to negligible risk. Click here (pdf) for an up-to-date list.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Because the segmental demyelination in patients with CMT4J is similar to that observed in acquired demyelinating neuropathies, a few patients have been treated with intravenous immunoglobin [Cottenie et al 2013]. No obvious effect has been observed.