http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/drpla

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA), the following evaluations are recommended:

EEG in the presence of seizures

Head MRI to monitor progression of the disease

Neuropsychological testing for evidence of dementia and psychiatric disturbance

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Consultation with a rehabilitation therapist

Treatment of Manifestations



The following are appropriate:

Treatment of seizures with antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) in a standard manner

Treatment of psychiatric problems with appropriate psychotropic medications

Symptomatic treatment of ataxia using riluzole and rehabilitation therapy [van de Warrenburg et al 2014, Romano et al 2015]

Adaptation of environment and care to the level of dementia

For affected children, adaptation of educational programming to abilities

Surveillance



Surveillance is individualized based on disease progression.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



General anesthesia can increase the risk of intra- and postoperative seizures [Takayama et al 2002].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



In general, women with epilepsy or a seizure disorder from any cause are at greater risk for mortality during pregnancy than pregnant women without a seizure disorder; use of antiepileptic medication during pregnancy reduces this risk. However, exposure to antiepileptic medication may increase the risk for adverse fetal outcome (depending on the drug used, the dose, and the stage of pregnancy at which the medication is taken). Nevertheless, the risk of an adverse outcome to the fetus from medication exposure is often less than that associated with exposure to an untreated maternal seizure disorder. Therefore, use of antiepileptic medication during pregnancy is typically recommended. Discussion of the risks and benefits of using a given antiepileptic drug during pregnancy should ideally take place prior to conception. Transitioning to a lower-risk medication prior to pregnancy may be possible [Sarma et al 2016].

The use of riluzole during pregnancy has not been well studied in humans. One woman took riluzole throughout her pregnancy and delivered a healthy term infant whereas another woman delivered an infant with growth restriction [Kawamichi et al 2010, Scalco et al 2012].

See mothertobaby.org for further information on medication use during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.