http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/dystonia

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with DYT1 early-onset isolated dystonia, the following evaluations are recommended:

Thorough history, including family history

General physical examination

Neurologic examination. The standard scale used to measure the clinical extent of dystonia is the Burke-Fahn-Marsden rating scale.

If evidence of psychiatric problems (especially depression) exist, consideration of psychiatric assessment

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Consideration of occupational and/or physical therapy evaluation

Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms [Albanese et al 2011, Lubarr & Bressman 2011, Bertucco & Sanger 2015, Dressler et al 2016, Shanker & Bressman 2016].

Oral medications are usually tried first:

Anticholinergics (e.g., trihexyphenidyl)

Trihexyphenidyl can be titrated to high doses (in the range of 100 mg/day) in children, who tend to tolerate high doses better than adults.

Anticholinergic side effects, particularly cognitive effects, must be monitored closely. Pyridostigmine can be used to counter anticholinergic side effects, but does not improve cognitive side effects.

Baclofen (Lioresal®)

Benzodiazepines

Other medications including levodopa, antiepileptics, and dopamine-depleting agents; these have been used to treat dystonia with variable effects.

Botulinum toxin injections directly into dystonic muscles are generally the treatment of choice for adult-onset focal dystonias. For individuals with more widespread dystonia in whom specific muscle groups produce disabling symptoms, such injections may also be helpful and are often used in combination with oral medications.


If medications fail

Surgery to enable deep-brain stimulation (DBS) of the globus pallidus interna (GPi) has been shown to be an effective treatment for medically refractory isolated generalized dystonia in randomized controlled studies [Vidailhet et al 2005, Kupsch et al 2006, Vidailhet et al 2007], including in individuals with DYT1 early-onset dystonia [reviewed in Fox & Alterman 2015].

GPi DBS has become a well-established and important treatment option for individuals with medically refractory DYT1 early-onset dystonia. Overall, individuals with DYT1 early-onset dystonia tend to have good outcomes after GPi DBS, with some showing dramatic improvement.

Some, though not all, studies have found that the presence of a TOR1A pathogenic variant is a positive predictive factor of good outcome of GPi DBS surgery [Isaias et al 2008, Andrews et al 2010, Borggraefe et al 2010, Air et al 2011].

Shorter disease duration has been correlated with improved outcomes, highlighting the importance of early referral for DBS in children with severe, medically refractory DYT1 dystonia. [Markun et al 2012, Lumsden et al 2013]. Conversely, referral for DBS should not be made prematurely (i.e., prior to sufficient medication trials).

Clinical effect has been found to be well sustained at follow up of up to 13 years [Alcindor et al 2010, Cif et al 2010, Panov et al 2013, Krause et al 2016].

Note: Intrathecal baclofen therapy has been used for treatment of generalized dystonia of various etiologies in the past [van Hilten et al 2000, Walker et al 2000, Albright et al 2001], however, GPi DBS surgery has become the preferred surgical treatment for severe, medically refractory DYT1 early-onset dystonia because of the good treatment outcomes.

Physical therapy and an appropriate exercise program may be of benefit.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Aggressive medical and surgical intervention including regular follow up for adjustment of medicines and timely referral for GPi DBS surgery when indicated is appropriate in order to prevent long-term orthopedic complications such as joint contractures or spine deformities. However, little systematic data support or negate the use of this approach.

Surveillance



Follow up several times a year with a neurologist specializing in movement disorders is recommended (especially if there is progression) to prevent secondary complications, although little information regarding the benefit of this approach is available.

Individuals treated with GPi DBS surgery require regular follow up, more frequent in the first year after surgery, for programming of the stimulation parameters and monitoring of battery life.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



The extremities affected by dystonia should not be placed in a brace or cast, unless medically necessary, as this can worsen the dystonia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Data on the use of the oral medications typically used for treatment of dystonia during pregnancy are limited. Isolated case reports of treatment with trihexyphenidyl or carbidopa/levodopa for various conditions (including certain forms of dystonia) during pregnancy have not found adverse effects on either the affected mother or the fetus [Watanabe et al 2009, Mendhekar & Andrade 2011, Robottom & Reich 2011, Serikawa et al 2011, Watanabe & Matsubara 2012, Dostal et al 2013].

No adverse fetal or maternal outcomes were reported in two series of women, including four women with DYT1 dystonia, who were treated with DBS implantation prior to pregnancy. [Scelzo et al 2015, Ziman et al 2016].

Therapies Under Investigation



RNA interference (RNAi) has been used in cell culture systems overexpressing the mutated torsin protein to block aggregate formation and restore normal distribution of wild type torsin-1A (torsinA) [Kock et al 2006], suggesting a possible future role for RNAi in DYT1 therapy.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.