http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/gaucher

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



See Surveillance for evaluations used to establish disease severity in an individual diagnosed with Gaucher disease (GD).

Baseline (pre-treatment) assessments may be useful in selecting treatment modality and regimen (i.e., enzyme dose and frequency of infusion).

Factors that may influence the extent of clinical testing at the time of diagnosis:

Age

Mode of ascertainment (e.g., family screening vs disease signs and symptoms)

Presence/absence of primary neurologic involvement

Treatment of Manifestations



Management by a multidisciplinary team with expertise in treating GD is available at Comprehensive Gaucher Centers (see National Gaucher Foundation).

Although enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) has changed the natural history of GD and eliminated the need for splenectomy in individuals with hypersplenism, persons not receiving ERT and certain other individuals may require symptomatic treatment, including the following:

Partial or total splenectomy for individuals with massive splenomegaly with significant areas of infarction and persistent severe thrombocytopenia with high risk of bleeding

Transfusion of blood products for severe anemia and bleeding. Anemia and clotting problems unresponsive to ERT should prompt investigations for an intercurrent disease process. Evaluation by a hematologist is recommended prior to any major surgical or dental procedures or parturition [Hughes et al 2007].

Analgesics for bone pain. Persistent bone pain in individuals receiving ERT should prompt evaluations to exclude the possibility of a mechanical problem (e.g., pathologic fracture or joint collapse secondary to osteonecrosis, degenerative arthritis).

Joint replacement surgery for relief from chronic pain and restoration of function (i.e., improved joint range of motion). Bone pain in individuals who have undergone joint replacement may indicate a problem with the prosthesis and the need for surgical revision.

Supplemental treatment. Oral bisphosphonates and calcium/vitamin D may benefit individuals with GD and low bone density [Wenstrup et al 2004].

Persons with GD with findings suggestive of multiple myeloma and parkinsonism should be referred to the appropriate specialists.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations




Bone marrow transplantation (BMT)

Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) has been undertaken in individuals with severe GD, primarily those with chronic neurologic involvement (type 3 GD). Successful engraftment can correct the metabolic defect, improve blood counts, and reduce increased liver volume. In a few individuals, stabilization of neurologic and bone disease has occurred. However, the morbidity and mortality associated with BMT limit its use in individuals with type 1 and type 3 GD. Therefore, this procedure has been largely superseded by enzyme replacement therapy (see ERT).

Individuals with chronic neurologic GD and progressive disease despite ERT may be candidates for BMT or a multi-modal approach (i.e., combined ERT and BMT).

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). ERT is based on the provision of sufficient exogenous enzyme to overcome the block in the catabolic pathway and effect the clearance of the stored substrate, GL1.

Global availability may differ, but there are three recombinant glucocerebrosidase enzyme preparations currently available. All are based on the human gene sequence, but are distinguished according to the cell type involved in their production: imiglucerase (Cerezyme®) generated in Chinese hamster ovary cells; velalglucerase alfa (VPRIV®) from human fibroblast-like cell line; and taliglucerase alfa (Elelyso®) from a carrot cell line. Each formulation is modified to expose the alpha-mannosyl (carbohydrate) residues for enhanced uptake by the macrophage.

Regular intravenous infusions of the recombinant enzymes imiglucerase and velaglucerase have been demonstrated to be safe and effective in reversing those features resulting from hematologic and visceral (liver/spleen) involvement [Weinreb et al 2002, Zimran et al 2010]. Experience with taliglucerase alfa appears comparable [Zimran et al 2011, Ben Turkia et al 2013].

It is likely that end-stage histologic changes (e.g., fibrosis, infarction) influence the response to ERT. Thrombocytopenia may persist in individuals with residual splenomegaly and/or the presence of splenic nodules [Stein et al 2010].

ERT is well tolerated. Approximately 10%-15% of individuals develop antibodies to infused imiglucerase; whereas antibody formation has been reported in 1% of persons receiving velaglucerase. In most cases these individuals remain asymptomatic [Rosenberg et al 1999, Starzyk et al 2007]. Adverse effects (e.g., pruritus, hives) are relatively well controlled with premedication using antihistamines.

Individuals with type 1 GD report improved health-related quality of life after 24-48 months of ERT [Damiano et al 1998, Masek et al 1999, Weinreb et al 2007]. After prolonged treatment, ERT reduces the rate of bone loss in a dose-dependent manner [Wenstrup et al 2007], improves bone pain, and reduces bone crises [Charrow et al 2007].The effectiveness of ERT for the treatment of neurologic disease remains to be established, although a few reports have suggested some benefit [Poll et al 2002].

Individuals with type 2 GD and pyramidal tract signs are not likely to respond to ERT, perhaps because the underlying neuropathology is cell death rather than lysosomal storage of GL1 [Takahashi et al 1998]. These individuals and those with hydrops fetalis are not appropriate candidates for BMT, ERT, or substrate reduction therapy (SRT) [Campbell et al 2003, Migita et al 2003].

Individuals with type 3 GD appear to derive some benefit from ERT, although long-term prognosis remains to be defined for this heterogeneous group [Vellodi et al 2001]. Onset of progressive myoclonic seizures while on ERT appears to indicate a poor prognosis [Frei & Schiffmann 2002]. Brain stem auditory evoked responses have deteriorated in individuals with type 3 GD on ERT [Campbell et al 2003]. SRT used in combination with ERT for type 3 GD with progressive neurologic disease does not appear to alter ultimate prognosis.

Consensus recommendations exist for ERT and monitoring of children with type 1 GD [Baldellou et al 2004, Charrow et al 2004, Grabowski et al 2004] (see Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements). The optimal dose and frequency of recombinant enzyme administration is not certain, mostly because of limited information regarding tissue half-life and distribution and the limitations associated with the modalities used for assessing clinical disease course. Intravenously infused enzyme may not reach adequate concentrations in certain body sites (e.g., brain, bones, and lungs). In the majority of individuals, treatment is initiated with a dose of 15-60 units of enzyme per kg of body weight administered intravenously every two weeks. The enzyme dose may be increased or decreased after initiation of treatment and during the maintenance phase, based on response – i.e., hematopoietic reconstitution, reduction of liver and spleen volumes, and stabilization or improvement in skeletal findings [Pastores et al 2004].

Affected individuals may require assistance with insurance-related issues and reimbursement because of the high cost of ERT.

Substrate reduction therapy (SRT). SRT aims to restore metabolic homeostasis by limiting the amount of substrate precursor synthesized (and eventually subject to catabolism) to a level that can be effectively cleared by the mutant enzyme with residual hydrolytic activity [Dwek et al 2002]. A potential concern regarding the use of SRT is its nonspecificity; i.e., the substrate whose production is blocked or limited is a precursor in the formation of other glycosphingolipids (ganglio- and lacto- series).

Miglustat, the first oral agent for the treatment of individuals with mild to moderate Gaucher disease for whom ERT is not a therapeutic option (e.g., because of constraints such as allergy, hypersensitivity, or poor venous access). Miglustat has been approved in Canada, countries of the European Union, Israel, Switzerland, and the US. In at least three studies, involving more than 30 individuals with GD type 1, miglustat treatment resulted in a significant decrease in liver and spleen volume after six to 18 months, with clinical improvement noted over 24 months. Bone involvement and platelet and hemoglobin values remained stable or were modestly improved [Cox et al 2000, Elstein et al 2004a, Pastores et al 2005]. An increase in bone density at the lumbar spine and femoral neck was reported to occur as early as six months after the initiation of miglustat monotherapy [Pastores et al 2007]. The most common adverse reactions noted in the clinical trials were weight loss (60% of individuals), and bloating, flatulence, and diarrhea (80%), which resolved or diminished with longer use of the product.

Eliglustat, an alternative inhibitor of glucosylceramide synthetase recently approved by the FDA, has been shown in clinical trials to be a safe and effective treatment for individuals with Gaucher disease type 1 who are not on any therapy as well as those previously treated with ERT.

In a placebo-controlled phase 3 study (ENGAGE) of patients not previously on any therapy, those who were given eliglustat for nine months showed a 28% decrease in spleen volume and a 7% decrease in liver volume as well as a 1.2 gm/dL increase in hemoglobin level and 42% increase in platelet count [Mistry et al 2015].

In a separate phase 3 study (ENGAGE) of patients previously on ERT, eliglustat demonstrated outcomes similar to imiglucerase for the composite primary endpoint of stability in spleen and liver volume, hemoglobin level, and platelet count from baseline to 12 months [Cox et al 2015].

An effect on GD-related bone disease was suggested by a significant increase in lumbar spine T-scores (mean of -1.6 to -0.9) in 19 patients enrolled in the pivotal phase 2 study who were on eliglustat therapy for up to four years [Kamath et al 2014].

Note: (1) Reported side effects of eliglustat were generally mild. (2) The use of eliglustat requires cytochrome P450 2D6 genotyping and avoidance of drugs that may interact through this metabolic pathway. (3) Drug distribution studies indicate that eliglustat, a P-glycoprotein ligand, is not transported across the blood-brain barrier and, thus, not indicated for neuronopathic forms of GD. Preclinical studies involving analogs that may be efficacious for primary CNS involvement are ongoing [Larsen et al 2012].

Prevention of Secondary Complications



The use of anticoagulants in individuals with severe thrombocytopenia and/or coagulopathy should be discussed with a hematologist to avoid the possibility of excessive bleeding.

Surveillance



Physicians who are the US regional coordinators for the International Collaborative Gaucher Group Registry (ICGG) and other groups have published recommendations for comprehensive serial monitoring of the severity and rate of disease progression [Baldellou et al 2004, Charrow et al 2004, Grabowski et al 2004, Vom Dahl et al 2006]:

Medical history (at least every 6-12 months) including weight loss, fatigue, depression, change in social, domestic, or school- or work-related activities, bleeding from the nose or gums, menorrhagia, shortness of breath, abdominal pain, early satiety as a result of abdominal pressure, joint aches or reduced range of movement, and bone pain

Physical examination (at least every 6-12 months) including: heart and lungs, joint range of motion, gait, neurologic status, evidence of bleeding (bruises, petechiae). In children, attention should be given to growth (height, weight, and head circumference using standardized growth charts) and pubertal changes (using the Tanner staging system). Neurologic evaluation is particularly important in the early detection of type 2 and type 3 disease in children. A severity scoring tool has been developed to evaluate neurologic features of neuronopathic GD [Davies et al 2007].

Assessment of hemoglobin concentration and platelet count (with frequency based on symptoms and treatment status). Hemoglobin, platelet count, and coagulation indices should also be assessed prior to surgical or dental procedures.

Other blood tests at the physician's discretion may include measurement of the following:

Serum concentrations of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase, liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferanse or alanine amino transferase), iron, ferritin, and vitamins B12 and D.

Plasma activity of chitotriosidase, a macrophage-derived chitin-fragmenting hydrolase, and plasma concentration of PARC/CCL18. Levels are typically elevated, and are felt to correlate with body-wide burden of disease. An enzyme dose-dependent decrease in plasma chitotriosidase activity has been observed in affected individuals on ERT; however, up to 40% of affected individuals of European origin are homozygous or heterozygous for a common null variant, confounding interpretation of test results [Grace et al 2007].

Assessment of spleen and liver volumes by MRI or volumetric computed tomography (CT). Parenchymal abnormalities can be identified as well. In situations in which access to an MRI or CT is problematic, abdominal ultrasonography (US) may be performed. Abdominal US may provide information on organ volume and parenchymal abnormalities and also call attention to the presence of gallstones [Patlas et al 2002]. MRI or US are the preferred modalities in the pediatric population.

Screening for pulmonary hypertension. EKG and echocardiography with Doppler studies to identify elevated pulmonary artery pressure


Skeletal assessment

Plain radiographs of the femur (anterior-posterior view), spine (lateral view), and any symptomatic sites. Radiographs can reflect the status of both the compact/mineralized compartment and medullary compartment. In children, particularly those with signs of growth and pubertal delay, x-ray of the left hand and wrist to determine bone age is appropriate.

Coronal T1- and T2-weighted MR images of the hips to the distal femur. T1-weighted MRI is the most sensitive method for following bone marrow infiltration. T2-weighted MRI is the most sensitive method for detecting active bone infarcts, osteonecrosis, and osteomyelitis [Maas et al 2002b]. The developmental transition from cellular (red) to fatty (yellow) bone marrow, which normally occurs from childhood to early adulthood, may confound interpretation of the extent of long bone infiltration by Gaucher cells (lipid-engorged macrophages) in affected children younger than age 15 years [McHugh et al 2004]. Semiquantitative methods (BMB score and S-MRI score) have been developed to facilitate serial assessments [Robertson et al 2007, Roca et al 2007].

Other methods include dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) to identify osteoporosis and risk for pathologic fractures, technetium Tc-99 sulfur colloid nuclear scanning to assess location and extent of infiltration [Mariani et al 2003], and quantitative chemical-shift MRI or spectroscopy to quantify decrease in bone marrow fat content as a marker of bone marrow infiltration [Maas et al 2002a].

Assessment of disease severity. Two recent reports have delineated a means for scoring disease severity, incorporating standard assessments of disease severity [Di Rocco et al 2008, Weinreb et al 2010]. With increasing therapeutic options, the ability to benchmark response may inform the modality of choice and selected regimen [Weinreb et al 2008].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be avoided in individuals with moderate to severe thrombocytopenia.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to offer testing to asymptomatic at-risk relatives so that those with glucocerebrosidase enzyme deficiency or two disease-causing alleles can benefit from early diagnosis and treatment to reduce morbidity.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Pregnancy may affect the course of GD both by exacerbating preexisting symptoms and by triggering new features such as bone pain. Women with severe thrombocytopenia and/or clotting abnormalities may have an increased risk of bleeding around the time of delivery [Elstein et al 2004b].

Therapies Under Investigation



Chaperone-mediated enzyme enhancement therapy. Pharmacologic chaperones, competitive reversible active site inhibitors, serve as a folding template for the defective enzyme during its transit to the ER. Such agents may restore enzyme activity within the lysosome and clear stored substrate. The drug isofagamine, which has been shown to exhibit these properties in studies of cultured fibroblasts in vitro, is currently in clinical trials to establish its safety and efficacy when given to adults with type 1 GD [Steet et al 2007].

Ambroxol, a mucolytic agent, is also a potential pharmacologic GBA chaperone [Zimran et al 2013].

Histone deacetylase inhibitors increase the quantity and activity of glucocerebrosidase by limiting the deacetylation of heat shock protein 90. As a consequence, there is less enzyme degradation [Yang et al 2013].

Gene therapy. Gene therapy involves the introduction of GBA into hematopoietic stem cells [Enquist et al 2006]. In limited trials, some enzyme has been produced by transduced cells, but enzyme production does not appear to be sustained and therefore does not result in a permanent cure. It is anticipated that transduced cells would not have a proliferative advantage over uncorrected cells. Furthermore, it is unlikely that significant metabolic cross-correction would occur as only small amounts of enzyme are secreted into the circulation.

In a murine model of GD (D409V/null) intravenous administration of a recombinant AAV8 serotype vector bearing human glucocerebrosidase resulted in sustained hepatic enzyme secretion, preventing GL-1 accumulation in presymptomatic mice and normalizing GL-1 levels in older mice [McEachern et al 2006].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other



The elevation of the serum concentration of several serologic markers (e.g., D-dimer, CCL18/PARC, CD163) in persons with GD is considered a possible surrogate indicator of disease burden that could be used in monitoring treatment response [Shitrit et al 2003, Boot et al 2004, Møller et al 2004]. However, the prognostic value of these markers, their role in patient stratification according to clinical disease severity, and/or determination of the optimum time to initiate therapy are unknown.