http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/gsd6

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with GSD VI, a clinical genetics consultation is recommended:

Treatment of Manifestations



Some individuals with glycogen storage disease type VI (GSD VI) may not require any treatment, but most have better growth and stamina with therapy.

For hypoglycemia, frequent small meals and uncooked cornstarch (1.5-2 g/kg) given one to three times a day may normalize blood glucose concentration and avoid ketosis.

For children and adults with no hypoglycemic episodes, a bedtime dose of cornstarch (1.5-2 g/kg) can improve energy and well-being [Nakai et al 1994].

When on cornstarch therapy, children have improved growth and bone density and decreased liver size — findings that may be significant when considering lifestyle-related issues [Author, personal observation].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Hepatomegaly and hypoglycemia may be prevented by administration of uncooked cornstarch (1.5-2 g/kg) one to three times a day.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Osteoporosis related to chronic ketosis is common in GSD VI that has not been aggressively treated; treatment with complex carbohydrates or cornstarch may improve bone density.

Short stature and delayed puberty, which also occur in the setting of chronic ketosis, improve with better metabolic control.

Surveillance



Routine monitoring of blood glucose concentration and blood ketones to assess control is recommended as well as monitoring of both around periods of increased activity and illness. Note: Since ketosis is usually more severe than hypoglycemia, blood ketone level is more indicative of control than blood glucose concentration.

Monitoring of blood ketones upon awakening at least several times per month using a portable blood ketone meter is recommended. The goal is to maintain blood beta-OH-butyrate concentrations lower than 0.3 mmol/L.

Hypoglycemia is uncommon on waking since counter-regulation can raise blood glucose concentrations; however, monitoring of blood glucose concentrations at 2 AM to 4 AM can reveal periods of suboptimal control.

Height and weight should be measured annually to monitor growth.

Although formal studies are lacking, the theoretic small risk of hepatic adenoma increases with age; thus, annual liver ultrasound examinations are recommended beginning at age five years.

Bone density determinations are recommended after growth is complete.

During pregnancy, women with GSD VI should monitor blood glucose concentrations, given that exacerbations of hypoglycemia may occur.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Avoid the following:

Excessive amounts of simple sugars to prevent excessive hepatic glycogen deposition

Glucagon administration as a rescue therapy for hypoglycemia because blood glucose concentrations will not increase

Growth hormone for short stature because it usually exacerbates ketosis and often is not efficacious

When hepatomegaly is present, contact sports (or use appropriate cautions)

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



If the family-specific pathogenic variants are known it is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing to at-risk sibs so that early diagnosis can lead to early treatment and avoidance of factors that exacerbate disease.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Although clinical and biochemical abnormalities usually resolve with age and most adults are asymptomatic, hypoglycemia can occur during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation



An extended-release cornstarch preparation is presently being tested in other types of GSD. This experimental product may improve maintenance of normoglycemia with fasting for a longer duration and may reduce the number of doses of cornstarch required.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.