http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hd-l2

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with Huntington disease-like 2 (HDL2), the following evaluations are recommended:

Neuroimaging studies to exclude other lesions, such as subdural hematomas secondary to falls, which may be contributing to signs or symptoms

Standardized rating instruments, such as the Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale (UHDRS) or Quantitated Neurological Examination (QNE) for motor abnormalities and the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) for cognition

Genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment is symptomatic and based on the treatment for HD and other neurodegenerative disorders.

Pharmacologic agents may suppress abnormal movements. The most common choices are low-dose neuroleptic agents, such as fluphenazine or haloperidol.

Tremor in one individual was suppressed with clonazepam. However, clonazepam, levodopa/carbidopa, anticholinergics, and typical and atypical neuroleptics were not found helpful in treating the abnormal movements of other affected individuals.

Based on experience with Huntington disease, antidepressants, antipsychotics, mood stabilizers (lithium, valproic acid, carbamazepine, and lamotragine), and occasionally stimulants may be effective in treating the psychiatric manifestations of HDL2.

In the only report specifically related to HDL2, depression partially responded to sertaline in one individual and to nortriptyline in another individual [Walker et al 2003b].

The affected individual, other family members, and care providers should be educated regarding the likely course of the disease. Assurance that cognitive decline, depression, apathy, and irritability are manifestations of the disease rather than the "fault" of the individual can decrease stress and guilt.

Environmental interventions (establishing regular schedules, easing of expectations to maintain the family finances, encouraging the use of lists to assist with memory) may help.

Families often need help in obtaining social services (see Resources).

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



No known treatment stops or slows the progression of HDL2.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Loose rugs and clutter should be removed from the individual's home to help prevent falls and other injuries. Driving may need to be curtailed or limited to prevent risk of accidents. Food preparation may need to be altered to prevent choking.

Surveillance 



Nutrition and swallowing should be monitored. Feeding changes should be implemented when necessary to minimize the risk of aspiration.

Gait should be monitored, with consultation as needed from physical therapists to provide the most appropriate strategies or devices to minimize falls.

Driving safety should be monitored, with consideration of formal driving safety evaluations if safety is uncertain.

Monitor mood and irritability so that measures to decrease the risk of suicide, other behavioral abnormalities, and distress may be implemented.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Any agents that increase ataxia should be used with caution.

Individuals with HDL2, like others with neurodegenerative disorders, are vulnerable to delirium from medical illnesses and medicines, especially polypharmacy.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management 



There is no specific information available about disease management during pregnancy. Prudence suggests close attention to prevention of falls and monitoring for swallowing difficulties. Medications should be reviewed to assess their safety during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.