http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hfi

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary fructose intolerance (HFI), evaluation by the following specialists is recommended:

Biochemical geneticist or pediatrician with an interest in metabolic disorders

Dietician with experience in managing inherited metabolic diseases

Hepatologist

Nephrologist

Clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Acute presentations should be managed symptomatically in a hospital setting, including intravenous glucose (dextrose) administration, supportive treatment of hepatic insufficiency (including fresh frozen plasma or exchange transfusion), and treatment of metabolic acidosis, if present.

Dietary restriction of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol is the cornerstone of HFI treatment (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations). During acute episodes of intoxication, including at the time of initial diagnosis, immediate and absolute elimination of fructose (by substitution of fructose with other carbohydrate sources including glucose, maltose, and cornstarch) rapidly reverses symptoms and should result in normalization of related metabolic disturbances.

Ongoing education for children and adults concerning the need for dietary restriction is recommended, and should ideally be handled by nutritionists with specific experience in treating HFI and other inherited metabolic diseases.

Individuals with HFI are advised to wear a medically approved alert bracelet/necklace at all times.

Hepatomegaly with steatosis and lipid vacuolization may remain a persistent complication despite fructose restriction and resolution of initial fibrosis. This includes individuals ascertained by family history and treated from birth [Odièvre et al 1978]. The reason for this remains to be determined, but may be related to insufficient fructose restriction as well as lower tolerance of fructose early in life [Froesch et al 1963].

Chronic renal insufficiency, specifically proximal tubular dysfunction, may also persist despite fructose restriction. Typically resolution of renal disease occurs shortly after starting fructose restriction [Odièvre et al 1978]. In rare historical instances, dietary modification did not affect renal dysfunction [Mass et al 1966, Morris 1968]. This may be a result of earlier, incomplete attempts at restriction, as reported patients tended to manage themselves with self-restriction alone. It may also be in part due to primary defects in aldolase function and ATPase interaction within the proximal tubule, leading to dysfunctional acid-base regulation, renal tubular insufficiency (manifesting as glucosuria, aminoaciduria, and phosphaturia), and nephrocalcinosis [Mass et al 1966, Morris 1968, Lu et al 2001, Steinmann & Santer 2011].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Dietary restriction of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol is necessary for the treatment/management of HFI (Table 3).

Specific ingredients to avoid include fructose, high-fructose corn syrup, honey, agave syrup, inverted sugar, maple-flavored syrup, molasses, palm or coconut sugar, and sorghum.

In addition, medicines and formulas in which fructose/sucrose may not be listed as a primary component, examples of which include syrups, enema solutions, some immunoglobulin solutions, and many infant and pediatric nutritional drinks. When ingredients are listed, the terms “sugar,” “table sugar,” “natural flavorings” and even in some cases “sugar-free” or “no added sugar” (with no further clarification on the type of carbohydrate used) should raise suspicion for the presence of fructose, sucrose, or sorbitol.


Table 3. 

Dietary Guidelines for Hereditary Fructose Intolerance (HFI)




Food Category
Foods Permitted
Foods Prohibited





Dairy


Any milk, cheese, eggs
Milk products w/added sugar (sweetened yogurt, fruit yogurt, milkshake, chocolate milk)



Meat


Beef, veal, lamb, pork
Ham, bacon, hot dogs, processed meats; any other meat where sugar is used in processing



Fish


All fish
None



Poultry


Chicken, turkey
None



Cereal


Cooked or ready-to-eat cereals (except sweetened & sugar-coated cereals)
Sweetened/sugar-coated cereals



Fruit


None
All fruits, fruit juices, including squashes & cordials, & fruit extracts prohibited



Vegetables


Asparagus, cabbage, cauliflower, celery, green beans, green peppers, lettuce, nuts, onions, potatoes, spinach, wax beans
All other vegetables, including sweet potatoes



Bread


Breads prepared w/out fructose, sucrose, sugar, or sorbitol; soda crackers & saltines
Any breads or crackers prepared w/fructose/sucrose/sugar/sorbitol



Fat sources


Butter, margarine, oil, mayonnaise / mustard prepared w/out sugar
Mayonnaises, mustards, & salad dressings made with sugar



Desserts and sweeteners


Dietetic jello, dietetic ice cream, dietetic puddings; natural yogurt; glucose, dextrose, dextrin, maltose & zero-calorie sweeteners
All desserts containing sugar (cake, pie, cookies, candy, jello, ice cream, sherbet, honey, fruit juice); sugar, sucrose, sorbitol, fructose



Miscellaneous

Vegetable juices, coffee, tea, salt, pepper, broths/soups from permitted vegetables; some sugar substitutes; some dietetic beverages; pasta; rice; cinnamon, garlic, poppy seeds; peanut butter (when pure & w/out added sugars)
Ketchup & any other sauces / condiments containing sugar, jam, jelly, preserves, carbonated beverages / soda; peanut butter if prepared w/added sugars; chewing gum w/sorbitol





Adapted from www.bu.edu/aldolase/HFI/treatment/sugar_table.htm



Dietary Guidelines for Hereditary Fructose Intolerance (HFI)

Adapted from www.bu.edu/aldolase/HFI/treatment/sugar_table.htm

During hospitalizations special caution should be taken to avoid use of fructose-containing intravenous fluids. A number of reported accidental and iatrogenic fructose infusion-related deaths have prompted greater awareness of HFI [Locher 1987, Sachs et al 1993, Curran & Havill 2002, Müller et al 2003]; however, with a rare disorder such as HFI and in circumstances in which specific dietary (and infusion) restrictions may not be adequately disclosed, the danger of exposure in a hospital setting remains [Cox 1993]. The following are recommendations:

During any hospitalization, all members of the care team should be aware of the diagnosis of HFI and the patient is advised to wear at all times a medically approved alert bracelet/necklace that provides information about the diagnosis of HFI.

‘Red flags’ should be placed in the patient’s chart or medical record to alert practitioners to the HFI diagnosis and to medical risks associated with exposures to foods and/or medications (oral or parenteral) containing fructose, sucrose, or sorbitol.

Specific medicines known to contain fructose or fructose-like substances should be avoided.

For parenteral medications, hospital pharmacists should be utilized and medications should be cleared for use on a case-by-case basis.

Oral fructose challenge is no longer considered a favorable approach to diagnosis of HFI.

Dietary restriction should be strictly followed and maintained, especially in infancy. Although some have suggested that after age two years dietary restrictions can be relaxed somewhat [Steinmann & Santer 2011], currently, there are no specific guidelines regarding dietary fructose limits in any age group.

Tolerance of dietary fructose probably depends on an individual’s residual enzyme activity. Furthermore, because actual fructose content in foods may be unreliably reported or difficult to ascertain, adherence to complete dietary restriction of fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol may be difficult attain and unrealistic for some patients with HFI.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Ensuring adequate vitamin supplementation in the setting of reduced fruit and vegetable intake is imperative. Daily supplementation with a “sugar-free” multivitamin is recommended to prevent micronutrient deficiencies, specifically the water-soluble vitamins.

Surveillance



There are no formal guidelines for surveillance for individuals with HFI (e.g., frequency of subspecialty visits with physicians and/or dieticians with expertise in management of inherited metabolic diseases).

Once the diagnosis of HFI has been made, periodic evaluation of liver function, renal function, and growth is reasonable, particularly if there are concerns regarding compliance with the fructose/sucrose/sorbitol-restricted diet.

While isoelectric focusing of transferrin and/or monitoring of aspartylglucosaminidase (elevated in untreated HFI) have been suggested as markers of disease control in HFI, neither of these clinically available tests has definitively proven utility in diagnosis or surveillance [Pronicka et al 2007, Michelakakis et al 2009, Quintana et al 2009].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Great care should be taken to avoid enteral or parenteral exposure to fructose, sorbitol, sucrose, sucralose, and polysorbate as administration of these substances to individuals with HFI can be fatal.

The following resources can be valuable in determining medical and dietary safety.

Dietary guidance –including prohibited foods- is outlined in Table 3.

An extensive list of tolerated and non-tolerated sugars in HFI can be found online, a site curated by the Boston University HFI laboratory.

Although there is no single consolidated list of medications that contain these or related sugars, an advanced search on www.medicines.org.uk using the search term “fructose OR sorbitol OR sucrose OR sucralose” yielded 1776 results. Many such medications are oral suspensions or chewable flavored tabs designed for pediatric use. Also listed were injectable medications like immunoglobulin solutions (e.g., trastuzumab, filgrastim, some intravenous immunoglobulin solutions), vaccines (e.g., certain influenza, meningococcal), and iron supplements, as well as enema solutions and rinsing aids. For many preparations, it may not be apparent that fructose or similar compounds are present.

For parenteral medications, hospital pharmacists should clear use of medications on a case-by-case basis. Of particular note, a 24% sucrose solution (routinely administered to hospitalized neonates for minor procedures) should
not be given to neonates known to have HFI.

The fructose tolerance testing (‘fructose challenge’) to diagnose HFI can be hazardous and should not be used.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It may be appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs in order to identify individuals who would benefit from fructose restriction (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations). If the ALDOB pathogenic variants in the family are known, targeted molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk family members.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Few reports exist relating to management of pregnant women with HFI or pregnancy-related complications in HFI. In general, in familial reports in which pregnancies are not expressly discussed, it appears that HFI in a pregnant mother does not cause harm to the mother or the child provided that strict fructose avoidance is followed during the pregnancy.

In one family a woman with enzymatically documented HFI had three children (presumably from the same father), all of whom also had HFI [Marks et al 1989]. Most complications observed in these children seem to have resulted from their own poorly controlled HFI or comorbidities in early childhood, rather than maternal effects of HFI per se. The first child developed failure to thrive and cirrhosis and died at age six months of E. coli sepsis and pulmonary edema. The second child, who had HFI complicated by transfusion-acquired HIV infection, died at age five years from complications of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). In her third pregnancy, which proceeded normally, the mother was maintained on a strict fructose-restricted diet. The child also had HFI but thrived on a fructose-restricted diet.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.