http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hlrcc

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC), the following evaluations are recommended:

Detailed dermatologic examination for evaluation of extent of disease and lesions suspicious for cutaneous leiomyosarcoma to include biopsy for histologic confirmation

Baseline pelvic bimanual examination, pelvic MRI, and/or transvaginal pelvic ultrasound examination to screen for uterine fibroids

Baseline renal ultrasound examination and MRI to screen for renal tumors; abdominal CT scan with contrast should be reserved for when MRI is contraindicated

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Cutaneous lesions. Cutaneous leiomyomas should be examined by a dermatologist. Treatment of cutaneous leiomyomas is difficult:

Surgical excision may be performed for a solitary painful lesion.

Lesions can be treated by cryoablation and/or lasers.

Several medications, including calcium channel blockers, alpha blockers, nitroglycerin, antidepressants, and antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), have been reported to reduce pain [Ritzmann et al 2006].

Uterine fibroids should be evaluated by a gynecologist. The uterine fibroids of HLRCC are treated in the same manner as sporadic fibroids. However, most women with HLRCC may require medical and/or surgical intervention earlier than the general population. Medical therapy (currently including gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists [GnRHa], antihormonal medications, and pain relievers) may be used initially to treat uterine fibroids, to decrease the size of fibroids in preparation for surgical removal, and/or to provide temporary relief from the symptoms of fibroids. When possible, myomectomy to remove fibroids while preserving the uterus is the treatment of choice. Hysterectomy should be performed only when necessary.

Renal tumors. Early detection of kidney tumor in HLRCC is important. Surgical excision of these malignancies appears to require earlier and more extensive surgery than other hereditary kidney cancers. Further studies may demonstrate that even small tumors have a high grade of malignancy on pathologic review. Kidney tumors associated with HLRCC have an aggressive disease course. Therefore, these tumors must be managed with caution until more is known about the natural history. Because of the aggressive nature of renal cancers associated with HLRCC, total nephrectomy should be strongly considered in individuals with a detectable renal mass.

Surveillance



There is no consensus on clinical surveillance; the following recommendations are provisional until a consensus conference is conducted.

Individuals with the clinical diagnosis of HLRCC, individuals with heterozygous pathogenic variants in FH without clinical manifestations, and at-risk family members who have not undergone molecular genetic testing should have the following regular surveillance by physicians familiar with the clinical manifestations of HLRCC.

Skin. Full skin examination is recommended annually to every two years to assess the extent of disease and to evaluate for changes suggestive of leiomyosarcoma.

Uterus. Annual gynecologic consultation is recommended to assess severity of uterine fibroids and to evaluate for changes suggestive of leiomyosarcoma.


Renal

Yearly examination with abdominal MRI is recommended for individuals with normal initial baseline or follow-up abdominal MRI. MRI is preferred because of the potential added radiation exposure associated with CT over lifetime. Abdominal CT scan with contrast should be reserved for when MRI is contraindicated.

Any suspicious renal lesion (indeterminate lesion, questionable or complex cysts) detected at a previous examination should be followed with a CT scan with and without contrast. The use of renal ultrasound examination is helpful in the characterization of cystic lesions. PET-CT may be added to identify metabolically active lesions suggesting possible malignant growth. Caution: Ultrasound examination alone is never sufficient.

Renal tumors should be evaluated by a urologic oncology surgeon familiar with the renal cancer of HLRCC.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, molecular genetic testing of asymptomatic at-risk relatives improves diagnostic certainty, allows early surveillance and treatment in those with the family-specific pathogenic variant, and reduces costly screening procedures in those who have not inherited the pathogenic variant.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, fumarate hydratase enzyme assay can be used to clarify the disease status of at-risk relatives. Early recognition of clinical manifestations may allow timely intervention and improve outcome. Therefore, clinical surveillance of asymptomatic at-risk relatives for early detection is appropriate.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes

Therapies Under Investigation



Several studies of anti-VEGF and novel tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment in HLRCC and papillary RCC (including papillary type 2 RCC) have been conducted [Linehan & Rouault 2013]. Early report demonstrated improvement of progression-free survival in patients with papillary type 2 RCC with Sunitinib [Choueiri et al 2008, Clinical Trials].

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions