http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/hyper-card

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



An important subset of individuals with HCM are at increased risk for sudden cardiac death (SCD) and may benefit from an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD). Further evaluation to assess for the presence or absence of risk predictors associated with SCD is a standard part of patient management.

SCD risk factors include:

Personal history of ventricular fibrillation (VF), aborted/resuscitated sudden death / cardiac arrest, or sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT)

Family history of SCD

Extreme LVH (>30mm)

Hypotensive blood pressure response to exercise

Nonsustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) on ambulatory monitoring

Unexplained syncope

Risk factor information, obtained from the medical history, family history, and cardiovascular testing, includes:

Echocardiogram to measure the degree of LVH;

Exercise testing to assess blood pressure response to exercise;

Ambulatory monitoring for significant ventricular ectopy.

Accurate risk assessment is difficult because the positive predictive value of any single parameter – other than prior cardiac arrest or sustained VT – is relatively low. The presence of two or more risk factors has been associated with an increased risk for sudden cardiac death [Elliott et al 2000, Dimitrow et al 2010], although implantation of a primary prevention ICD may be appropriate in the presence of a single compelling risk factor. Conversely, the absence of any risk factors places an individual in a low-risk category [Maron et al 2003b], although 3%-5% of persons with SCD do not have a standard risk factor.

Guidelines [Garratt et al 2010, Gersh et al 2011]* recommend that implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) therapy:

Be used for all patients with a history of sustained VT and/or VF (see Treatment of Manifestations) as secondary prevention;

Be considered for primary prevention in patients with two or more risk factors; or selected patients with a single risk factor (see Prevention of Primary Manifestations);

Currently ICD implantation is the only effective treatment to prevent SCD, but it is associated with cumulative morbidity.

* See Published Guidelines/Consensus Statements for full text of guidelines.

Treatment of Manifestations



Treatment by physicians experienced in diagnosis and management of persons with HCM improves survival and quality of life. Treatment modalities include pharmacologic therapy, invasive septal reduction therapy, and pacemakers or implantable cardiac defibrillators. Cardiac transplantation may be necessary for patients who progress to advanced heart failure refractory to medical or device therapy.

No treatments currently exist to prevent or decrease disease development or to reverse established manifestations.

Medical management used for symptom palliation typically relies on the following:

Beta blockers

L-type calcium channel blockers

Disopyramide (its negative inotropic effects can reduce obstructive physiology)

Antiarrhythmic drug therapy for treatment of atrial fibrillation and/or ventricular arrhythmias

Note: Direct vasodilators (e.g., ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers) should be avoided in patients with obstructive physiology as they may exacerbate obstruction.

Diastolic dysfunction, a common feature of familial HCM that may contribute significantly to symptoms of exertional dyspnea and volume overload independent of obstruction, is typically challenging to treat:

Beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers can be used to slow heart rate and increase diastolic filling time.

Diuretics may be considered judiciously to relieve symptomatic volume overload with the caveat that patients may be preload-dependent to maintain adequate cardiac output, particularly if obstructive physiology is present.

When symptomatic obstruction is refractory to medical therapy, invasive septal reduction therapy may be considered to alleviate symptoms:

Surgical myectomy (removal of a section of muscle from the interventricular septum) has a long and established track record for reducing or eliminating symptoms.

Alcohol septal ablation is a more recently developed catheter-based procedure in which ethanol is injected through a septal perforator vessel to induce focal myocardial infarction targeting the portion of the septum that is primarily responsible for obstructive physiology.

For atrial fibrillation (AF), rate control and medical or invasive attempts at rhythm control may be required, based on symptom burden [Gersh et al 2011]. Because of high thromboembolic risk from atrial fibrillation (AF) in HCM, anticoagulation is recommended, even with paroxysmal occurrences.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



For individuals with familial HCM felt to be at increased risk for SCD, ICD therapy is an important consideration. ICDs are currently the best option for the prevention of SCD and have been shown to be effective in sensing and terminating ventricular tachycardia (VT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF).

The annual rate of appropriate ICD therapies has been estimated at 2%-4% in individuals with an ICD placed for primary prevention, and 4%-11% in individuals with an ICD placed for secondary prevention [Maron et al 2007, O'Mahony et al 2012].

The potential for complications must be considered in the discussion of ICD placement. Although ICDs are generally safe, they are not benign and cumulative morbidity needs to take into account the age at implantation and duration of therapy. The rate of complications has been reported at 5% per year in persons with HCM. The rate of inappropriate shocks is roughly double the rate of appropriate therapies in persons who received ICDs for primary prevention [Maron et al 2007, Lin et al 2009, O'Mahony et al 2012].

In the absence of highly sensitive, patient-specific predictors, the decision to implant an ICD requires detailed and thoughtful evaluation, as well as the active input of well-informed patients.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Because persons with HCM who develop atrial fibrillation are at increased risk for thromboembolic complications, anticoagulation should be strongly considered in those with persistent or paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.

Affected individuals with obstructive physiology have traditionally been considered at moderate risk for infective endocarditis, and previous guidelines have recommended antibiotic prophylaxis for this subgroup. Official guidelines have been revised and decision making should be individualized [Wilson et al 2007].

Surveillance



For individuals with HCM who do not currently meet criteria for placement of an ICD for primary prevention, risk for SCD should be reassessed approximately every 12-24 months (or sooner if any clinical parameters change) [Gersh et al 2011].

For relatives at risk for HCM. Screening guidelines for HCM have been proposed for the longitudinal evaluation of clinically unaffected at-risk family members (see Table 2). Note that the following screening guidelines apply both to relatives in whom a pathogenic variant has been identified and to asymptomatic first-degree relatives (adults and children) of an individual with primary HCM in whom a pathogenic variant has not been identified.

Because penetrance of diagnostic features (i.e., LVH) is age dependent, a single unremarkable evaluation does not exclude the possibility of future development of HCM. Diagnostic clinical manifestations are often not present in infancy/early childhood; they commonly develop during adolescence and early adulthood, but may also develop late in life. Therefore, longitudinal follow up is required at a frequency based on the individual’s age and family history, and physician discretion. Screening should be performed in response to any symptoms that develop or any change in clinical status.


Table 2. 

Guidelines for Clinical Screening of Healthy At-Risk Family Members with Physical Examination, Echocardiography, and Electrocardiogram (ECG)




Age
Screening Guideline




<12 yrs
Optional unless any of the following are present:
Family history of early HCM-related death, early development of LVH, or other adverse complicationsCompetitive athlete in intense training programSymptomsOther clinical findings that suggest early LVH



12-18 yrs
Repeat evaluation every 12-18 months


>18-21 yrs
Repeat evaluation every ≤5 years or in response to any change in symptomsMore frequent evaluation if the family has late-onset LVH or HCM-related complications





Adapted from Gersh et al [2011]



Guidelines for Clinical Screening of Healthy At-Risk Family Members with Physical Examination, Echocardiography, and Electrocardiogram (ECG)

Family history of early HCM-related death, early development of LVH, or other adverse complications

Competitive athlete in intense training program

Symptoms

Other clinical findings that suggest early LVH

Adapted from Gersh et al [2011]

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Affected individuals are advised to use moderation in all physical activities. Physical activity guidelines have been established to detail reasonable exercise restrictions for people with familial HCM [Maron et al 2004, Gersh et al 2011]:

Avoid competitive endurance training and participation in recreational activities that require an intensity level similar to competitive athletics.

Avoid burst activities, like sprinting, as well as intense isometric exercise, such as heavy weight lifting.

Avoid exercise in extreme environmental conditions and maintain adequate hydration.

To avoid exacerbation of obstructive physiology and worsening of symptoms, patients with outflow tract obstruction should be particularly careful in alcohol consumption; use Jacuzzis, steam rooms, saunas with caution; and avoid the following:

Dehydration/hypovolemia (therefore, diuretics must be used with caution)

Medications that decrease afterload (e.g., ACE inhibitors; angiotensin receptor blockers and other direct vasodilators including dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers)

Medications for erectile dysfunction (e.g., sildenafil, tadalafil)

Cautious use of stimulant medications may be considered in children diagnosed with HCM only after other treatment methods have been explored. Children with HCM undergoing treatment with stimulants should be carefully monitored by a pediatric cardiologist [Vetter et al 2008].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



If the pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, clarification of the genetic status of at-risk family members (see Figure 1) allows appropriate longitudinal evaluation of those who have the pathogenic variant (see Surveillance and Table 2).

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



The hemodynamic changes associated with pregnancy and delivery place women with familial HCM at increased risk for obstetric complications, particularly if significant obstructive physiology is present. Perinatal care with specialists experienced in cardiovascular medicine and high-risk obstetrics is highly recommended.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.