http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/kcnq3-dis

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with a KCNQ3-related disorder, the following evaluations are recommended:

In-depth neurologic examination

Developmental evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Benign familial neonatal epilepsy (BFNE). The seizures of BFNE are generally controlled with conventional antiepileptic treatment. Phenobarbital and phenytoin (loading doses of 15-20 mg/kg; maintenance doses of 3-4 mg/kg for both agents) [Painter et al 1981] are the antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) most commonly used to treat neonatal seizures.

Because of concerns over the suboptimal effectiveness and safety of phenytoin and phenobarbital, other anticonvulsants (e.g., levetiracetam and topiramate) are often used in neonates with refractory seizures, despite limited data and off-label use [Tulloch et al 2012]. However, refractory seizures are uncommon in KCNQ3-related BFNE.

A recent study has been performed to evaluate treatment responses in a small cohort of 19 individuals presenting with clinical features suggestive of BFNE. All but three had family histories of neonatal seizures. Of the 19 individuals, pathogenic variants in KCNQ2 were found in 14; pathogenic variants in KCNQ3 were present in two. Seventeen (88%) of 19 individuals were seizure free within hours of receiving oral carbamazepine (CBZ) or oxcarbazepine (OXC). Earlier initiation of CBZ was associated with shorter hospitalization. No side effects of CBZ were reported. All individuals had normal development and remain seizure free at a mean follow-up period of six months to 16 years (mean: 7.8 years). The authors concluded that CBZ is safe and rapidly effective in neonates with BFNE, even in status epilepticus, and that CBZ should be the drug of choice in benign familial neonatal seizures [Sands et al 2016].

Interictal EEG is generally normal and does not influence treatment duration.

Antiepileptic drugs are usually withdrawn at age three to six months.

Benign familial infantile epilepsy (BFIE). The seizures of BFIE are usually completely controlled with the AEDs phenobarbital, carbamazepine, or valproate. If adequately treated, very few individuals show recurrent seizures; seizure recurrence is often caused by a low starting dose of AEDs.

Antiepileptic medication is usually withdrawn after one to three years with no relapses.

Global Developmental Disability / Intellectual Disability Educational Issues



The following information represents typical management recommendations for individuals with developmental delay/intellectual disability in the United States; standard recommendations may vary from country to country.

Ages 0-3 years. Referral to an early intervention program is recommended for access to occupational, physical, speech, and feeding therapy. In the United States, early intervention is a federally funded program available in all states.

Ages 3-5 years. In the United States, developmental preschool through the local public school district is recommended. Before placement, an evaluation is made to determine needed services and therapies and an individualized education plan (IEP) is developed.


Ages 5-21 years

In the United States, an IEP based on the individual’s level of function should be developed by the local public school district. Affected children are permitted to remain in the public school district until age 21.

Discussion about transition plans including financial, vocation/employment, and medical arrangements should begin at age 12 years. Developmental pediatricians can provide assistance with transition to adulthood.

All ages. Consultation with a developmental pediatrician is recommended to ensure the involvement of appropriate community, state, and educational agencies and to support parents in maximizing quality of life. Some issues to consider:

Private supportive therapies based on the affected individual’s needs may be considered. Specific recommendations regarding type of therapy can be made by a developmental pediatrician.

In the United States:

Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) enrollment is recommended. DDA is a public agency that provides services and support to qualified individuals. Eligibility differs by state but is typically determined by diagnosis and/or associated cognitive/adaptive disabilities.

Families with limited income and resources may also qualify for supplemental security income (SSI) for their child with a disability.

Motor Dysfunction




Gross motor dysfunction

Physical therapy is recommended to maximize mobility and to reduce the risk for later-onset orthopedic complications (e.g., contractures, scoliosis, hip dislocation).

Consider use of durable medical equipment as needed (e.g., wheelchairs, walkers, bath chairs, orthotics, adaptive strollers).

For muscle tone abnormalities including hypertonia or dystonia, consider involving appropriate specialists to aid in management of baclofen, Botox®, anti-parkinsonian medications, or orthopedic procedures.

Fine motor dysfunction. Occupational therapy is recommended for difficulty with fine motor skills that affect adaptive function such as feeding, grooming, dressing, and writing.

Oral motor dysfunction. Assuming that the individual is safe to eat by mouth, feeding therapy – typically from an occupational or speech therapist – is recommended for affected individuals who have difficulty feeding due to poor oral motor control.

Communication issues. Consider evaluation for alternative means of communication (e.g., Augmentative and Alternative Communication) for individuals who have expressive language difficulties.

Social/Behavioral Issues



Children may qualify for and benefit from interventions used in treatment of autism spectrum disorder, including applied behavior analysis (ABA). ABA therapy is individualized to the child’s behavioral, social, and adaptive strengths and weaknesses and is typically performed one on one with a board-certified behavior analyst.

Consultation with a developmental pediatrician may be helpful in guiding parents through appropriate behavioral management strategies or providing prescription medications when necessary.

Concerns about serious aggressive or destructive behavior can be addressed by a pediatric psychiatrist.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



The potential complications of the disease treatment are those related to AED use.

Surveillance



BFNE. EEG at onset, age three, 12, and 24 months is recommended. The EEG at 24 months should be normal.

BFIE. EEG at onset, 12, 24, and 36 months is recommended. The EEG at 36 months should be normal.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



The management of a pregnant woman with a KCNQ3 pathogenic variant is the same as that of any other pregnant woman with a history of (or at risk for) epilepsy:

No medication is indicated if (a) the woman has been seizure free and is not taking medication or (b) the woman has no history of seizures.

Antiepileptic drug treatment may be continued for active epilepsy during pregnancy.

In general, women with epilepsy or a seizure disorder from any cause are at greater risk for mortality during pregnancy than pregnant women without a seizure disorder; use of antiepileptic medication during pregnancy reduces this risk. However, exposure to antiepileptic medication may increase the risk for adverse fetal outcome (depending on the drug used, the dose, and the stage of pregnancy at which medication is taken). Nevertheless, the risk of an adverse outcome to the fetus from antiepileptic medication exposure is often less than that associated with exposure to an untreated maternal seizure disorder. Therefore, use of antiepileptic medication to treat a maternal seizure disorder during pregnancy is typically recommended. Discussion of the risks and benefits of using a given antiepileptic drug during pregnancy should ideally take place prior to conception. Transitioning to a lower-risk medication prior to pregnancy may be possible [Sarma et al 2016].

See MotherToBaby for more information on medication use during pregnancy.

Therapies Under Investigation



The selective neuronal KCNQ potassium channel opener ezogabine (US-approved name; retigabine in the EU and Canada), an AED introduced in 2013 as adjunctive treatment of partial epilepsy in adults [Porter et al 2012], may represent a targeted therapy for KCNQ3-related seizures arising from variants that reduce channel activity. However, the discovery of additional side effects in the early post-marketing studies (blue discoloration of skin and retina) raised concerns about its use in children. Ezogabine has been commercially withdrawn as of June 2017.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.