http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/lgmd2a

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with calpainopathy, the following evaluations are recommended if they have not already been completed:

Complete physical evaluation including the grading of muscle strength in single upper, lower, proximal, and distal muscles and the analysis of several functional performances

Orthopedic examination when gait is severely impaired

When walking ability is compromised, an evaluation for physical therapy and orthoses, especially in later stages of the disease

Baseline pulmonary function testing (including forced vital capacity measurement)

Baseline cardiac evaluation including echocardiogram

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Appropriate management, tailored to each individual, can improve quality of life and prolong survival. The general approach is based on the typical progression and complications of individuals with LGMD as described by McDonald et al [1995], Bushby [1999], and Norwood et al [2007], and revised by the Committee of the American Academy of Neurology [Narayanaswami et al 2014]:

A passive physical therapy program [Oygard et al 2011] and stretching exercises should be instituted early after diagnosis to promote mobility, prolong walking, and slow the disease progression, in particular by maintaining joint flexibility. Individuals usually benefit from strengthening and gentle [Sveen et al 2013], low-impact aerobic exercise (swimming, stationary bicycling) with a supervised sub-maximal effort, which improves cardiovascular performance, increases muscle efficiency, and lessens muscle fatigue. Although there are no specific reports on supportive care, physical and occupational therapies are important [Eagle 2002].

Avoidance of prolonged immobility is recommended.

Technical aids can also compensate for the loss of certain motor abilities; canes, walkers, orthotics, and wheelchairs enable individuals to regain independence. The use of knee-ankle-foot orthoses at bedtime is recommended to prevent contractures. Scoliosis occurs mainly after wheelchair dependence and attention should be paid to seating [Norwood et al 2007].

Surgical intervention may be required for correction of orthopedic complications including foot deformities, scoliosis, and Achilles tendon contractures. Occasionally, scapular fixation may be required for particularly problematic scapular winging.

In the late stage of the disease, chronic respiratory insufficiency may occur and the use of respiratory aids may be indicated to prolong survival [Pollitt et al 2001, Norwood et al 2007, D’Angelo et al 2011, Richard et al 2016, Mori-Yoshimura et al 2017].

Individuals should be monitored for signs of nocturnal hypoventilation (sleep disturbances, early morning headache, daytime drowsiness).

Overnight pulse oxymetry is recommended if forced vital capacity is lower than 60% and the demonstration of nocturnal hypoventilation should lead to noninvasive nocturnal ventilation [Norwood et al 2007].

Intervention in the form of nocturnal ventilator assistance for respiratory failure (by noninvasive positive pressure ventilation, NIV, by nasal masks) may be life saving in severely affected individuals [Dirik et al 2001, Hashiguchi et al 2014, Mori-Yoshimura et al 2017].

Wheelchair-bound individuals may also develop weak cough efforts, placing them at risk of atelectasia, pneumonia, progressive mismatch, and respiratory failure.

Annual influenza vaccination and prompt treatment for chest and respiratory infections should be eventually addressed using a mechanical in-ex-sufflator [Mori-Yoshimura et al 2017].

Social and emotional support help to improve the quality of life, to maximize a sense of social involvement and productivity, and to reduce the sense of social isolation [Eggers & Zatz 1998].

Clinicians should anticipate and facilitate decision-making for affected individuals and their families as the disease progresses, including decisions regarding loss of mobility and need of assistance with activities of daily living, medical complications, and end-of-life care [Narayanaswami et al 2014].

Prevention of Secondary Manifestations



There are a number of measures that decrease disease manifestations in a symptomatic individual: control of weight gain, prevention of joint contractures by means of physical therapy and stretching exercises, and in the advanced stage, control of respiratory insufficiency. Physical therapy and stretching exercises can help to slow disease progression; therefore, a physical therapy program should be instituted early after diagnosis.

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

Annual monitoring of muscle strength, joint range of motion, and respiratory function:

Monitoring for orthopedic complications, such as foot deformities, scoliosis, and Achilles tendon contractures

Referral for pulmonary evaluation (eventually including pulmonary function tests) when there are complaints of excessive daytime somnolence, non-restorative sleep, early morning headache [Narayanaswami et al 2014]. Measurement of forced vital capacity should be made in sitting and supine position.

Examination of cardiac function in the advanced stage of disease (although it is not frequently compromised) [Dirik et al 2001, Okere et al 2013].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Strenuous and eccentric muscle exercise should be discouraged as it exacerbates muscle necrosis and could precipitate the onset of weakness or accelerate muscle wasting. Although individuals with minimal muscle weakness and functional limitation may be able to perform strenuous exercise, in some cases this may result in rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria [Lahoria & Milone 2016] which may lead to severe complications such as acute renal failure and compartment syndrome.

Body weight should be controlled to avoid obesity as well as excessive weight loss (atrophy of muscles can be accelerated by loss of muscle proteins).

Physical trauma, bone fractures, and prolonged immobility can induce disuse atrophy and thus should be avoided.

Although no association of the disease with malignant hyperthermia is reported, the use of succinylcholine and halogenated anesthetic agents should be avoided when possible (see Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility).

While the specific mechanism whereby cholesterol-lowering agents (e.g., statins) may produce muscle damage causing pain or weakness is unknown, such drugs should be avoided when possible.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual by molecular genetic testing of the CAPN3 pathogenic variant in the family in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of evaluation and subsequent surveillance. With the associated intrafamilial phenotype variability, the possibility of calpainopathy should not be excluded in sibs on the basis of absence of symptoms alone.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Women with calpainopathy do not have impaired uterine smooth muscle strength or function and typically have uncomplicated pregnancies. A higher incidence of abnormal fetal presentation was reported in wheelchair-bound individuals with LGMD [Awater et al 2012]. Epidural blockade can be difficult in those with severe spine deformities and appropriate general anaesthesia may be necessary. About half of persons with LGMD reported deterioration of clinical symptoms in pregnancy [Awater et al 2012].

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.