http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/mckd1

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with ADTKD-MUC1, the following evaluations are recommended:

Measurement of hemoglobin concentration and serum concentration of uric acid and creatinine

Measurement of blood pressure

Referral to a nephrologist for further evaluation

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Care by a nephrologist is recommended.

Treatment follows standard guidelines for chronic kidney disease – based on the level of the serum creatinine and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) – and its sequelae, which can include hypertension, anemia, and gout. Affected individuals are encouraged to prepare for kidney transplantation, the definitive treatment of ADTKD-MUC1, by staying in optimal health (e.g., by exercising, avoiding obesity and tobacco usage, and maintaining strict control of hypertension, dyslipidemia, and other cardiovascular risk factors).

Transplantation is curative, and the outcome from kidney transplantation in this group of patients is excellent.

Surveillance



Annually, starting at the time of diagnosis and continuing until chronic kidney disease (CKD) Stage 3:

Hemoglobin concentration

Serum concentrations of uric acid and creatinine

Blood pressure

After CKD Stage 3, follow up as determined by the treating nephrologist is appropriate.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Avoid use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), especially when dehydrated, as NSAIDs can further impair kidney function in individuals with CKD. Avoid all nephrotoxic drugs or use with caution depending on the clinical indication.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



For the purpose of early diagnosis and treatment. If the pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives (parents, sibs, and offspring). Relatives found to have a pathogenic variant can be monitored with serum creatinine measurements to allow early diagnosis and treatment (see Related Genetic Counseling Issues for discussion of testing of children.)

For the purpose of kidney donation. If an MUC1 pathogenic variant is known to be present in an affected family member, any relative who is a potential kidney donor should undergo molecular genetic testing to clarify his/her genetic status so that only those without the pathogenic variant are evaluated further. Several individuals with what appeared to be clinically normal kidney function have donated kidneys and later been found to have ADTKD, MUC1.Thus, it is important to test even those family members with normal kidney function to be certain that they do not have a pathogenic variant.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.