http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/npab

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) deficiency, the following evaluations are recommended:


Infants with NPD-A

Ophthalmologic examination, if not yet performed

Comprehensive neurologic evaluation

Compete blood count

Serum chemistries including liver function tests

Dietary consultation

Occupational and physical therapy evaluations

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor


NPD-B

Chest radiograph to assess the extent of interstitial lung disease

Pulmonary function testing, including assessment of diffusing capacity, in individuals old enough to cooperate

Bone age in children under age 18 years

Ophthalmologic examination

Neurologic examination

Baseline laboratory studies including complete blood count, fasting lipid profile, serum chemistries, liver function tests

Liver biopsy in individuals with evidence of deteriorating liver function

Consultation with a medical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations




Severe neurodegenerative form (NPD-A)

Progressive neurologic disease. Physical and occupational therapy to maximize function and to prevent contractures is appropriate. Aggressive therapy is not warranted and the plan for such treatment should be made in consultation with the neurologist, therapist(s), and family to establish realistic goals.

Nutrition. Feeding difficulties can make provision of adequate calories a major challenge. Regular consultation with a dietician should be provided. The use of nasogastric tube feeding or surgical placement of a feeding tube should be discussed with the family.

Sleep disorder. Irritability and sleep disturbance are quality-of-life issues for the entire family that sometimes require the use of sedatives.


NPD-B

Bleeding. Most affected individuals have thrombocytopenia. When bleeding is life threatening, transfusion of blood products is indicated. While partial splenectomy may be considered for individuals with severe hypersplenism, total splenectomy should be avoided because removal of the spleen exacerbates the pulmonary disease.

Pulmonary disease. Individuals with symptomatic pulmonary disease may require supplemental oxygen. Other measures to treat interstitial lung disease, such as steroids, have not been well studied. Several individuals have undergone bronchopulmonary lavage with variable results [Nicholson et al 2002].

Hyperlipidemia. Adults with hyperlipidemia should be treated to bring the serum concentration of total cholesterol into the normal range.

Growth retardation. Dietary assessment is indicated in all cases to assure that calorie intake is adequate for growth.

Note: Orthotopic liver transplantation in an infant with NPD-A and amniotic cell transplantation in several individuals with NPD-B have been attempted with little or no success [Kayler et al 2002].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Variable results have been reported with HSCT. Shah et al [2005] reported successful HSCT for NPD-A. Successful engraftment can correct the metabolic defect, improve blood counts, and reduce increased liver and spleen volumes. However, stabilization of the neurologic component following HSCT has not been reported; therefore, any attempts to perform HSCT in individuals with clinically evident neurologic disease should be considered experimental. The morbidity and mortality associated with HSCT limit its use.

Enzyme replacement therapy. See Therapies Under Investigation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Liver function needs to be monitored in individuals receiving medications with known hepatotoxicity (e.g., statins for treatment of hypercholesterolemia).

Surveillance



Individuals with NPD-A should receive routine care from a pediatrician and a neurologist including evaluation of the following:

Nutrition status

Occupational and physical therapy needs

Individuals with NPD-B should be evaluated at least yearly for the following:

History (at least every 6-12 months): growth and weight gain in children; fatigue; any change in social, domestic, or school- or work-related activities; bleeding, shortness of breath; abdominal pain; headaches; extremity pain

Physical examination including assessment of neurologic function

Blood tests including liver enzymes, platelet count, and fasting lipid profile

Pulmonary function testing and chest radiograph

Skeletal assessment by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA)

Nutrition assessment

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Individuals who have splenomegaly should avoid contact sports.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



If the SMPD1 pathogenic variants in the family are known it is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from early identification and treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



For pregnant women with NPD-B, prenatal care by a high-risk obstetrician is indicated to ensure appropriate monitoring of pulmonary function and hematologic status.

Therapies Under Investigation



Enzyme replacement therapy. A Phase I study of recombinant human acid sphingomyelinase in five adults with NPD-B using an intra-patient dose-escalation scheme was recently completed. This regimen was generally well tolerated with study subjects showing a reduced liver and spleen volumes and improved lung-diffusing capacity [Wasserstein et al 2015]. A Phase II study is currently underway in children with NPD-B, and a Phase II/III study is planned in adults with NPD-B.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.