http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pc

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with pachyonychia congenita, the following evaluations are recommended:

Thorough clinical examination to assess each affected area. These will vary based on the specific gene involved (see Table 2) and may need to be repeated once genetic testing is completed in order to fully understand the phenotype of the affected individual.

Medical history to determine what features actually are troubling the patient

Clinical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Preliminary treatment guidelines have been published [Goldberg et al 2014] (full text) and continue to be refined.

The current treatment modalities primarily center on symptomatic relief of pain, hygienic grooming practices including paring of hyperkeratotic areas, treatment of secondary infection when indicated, and use of various walking aids, including wheelchairs, crutches and canes.

Palmoplantar keratoderma. Frequent grooming of the feet is essential and includes paring down the hyperkeratotic areas. However, trimming too aggressively can greatly increase pain. Some find it helpful to soak the feet prior to the paring. The surface of the skin and the instruments used should be clean to avoid infection. Blisters should be punctured with a sterile needle, the fluid drained, and the blister roof left in place until it dries and is shed away.

Special orthotics or insoles, wicking socks, ventilated footwear or cushioned footwear can help to lessen the pain although pain varies from day to day and at times can be intense even at rest.

Maintaining ideal body weight can be a factor in reducing the hyperkeratosis and pain. Limiting walking or standing can help to reduce trauma and slightly diminish the resulting blisters, callus, and pain.

Topical therapies to remove the hyperkeratosis:

Emollients such as Vaseline® or lanolin-containing products are frequently used. Note: Creams and lotions containing keratolyics such as urea, lactic acid, salicylic acid, or propylene glycol have little effect, with some reporting negative side effects. Occlusive ointments are often poorly tolerated.

Oral retinoids, while reducing the keratoderma, do not affect the underlying blistering and fragility of the skin and sometimes increase the pain. Careful regulation of the dosage is necessary [Gruber et al 2012].

Nail dystrophy. Thickened nails are not typically painful, but become so when infected or traumatized. An effective tool for very thick nails and for children is a guillotine-type pet nail clipper which places no pressure on the nails. Other tools frequently used are razor or surgical blades or sanders such as a Dremel® tool.

If bacterial or fungal infections occur, systemic antibiotics or antifungals are indicated.

Particularly troublesome nails can be successfully removed surgically; however, few patients have had this procedure and in most cases – regardless of the specific pathogenic variant – the nails have re-grown.

Oral leukokeratosis. Good oral hygiene and frequent gentle brushing with a toothbrush can significantly improve the appearance of the thick, white patches on the tongue and oral mucosa; however, if done too vigorously, brushing may also traumatize the mucosa resulting in reactive hyperkeratosis.

Some individuals have reported reduction of the leukokeratosis in response to oral antibiotics, suggesting a possible bacterial contribution; more likely, improvement may be a response to the anti-inflammatory properties of the antibiotics.

Follicular hyperkeratosis. Especially bothersome for children and teens, this finding can be treated with alpha-hydroxy acid creams or lotions or keratolytic emollients; however, these treatments may not be especially effective for PC. The use of emollients such as Vaseline® or lanolin-containing products is reported to be as effective.

Leukokeratosis with laryngeal involvement. Reported only in children with PC-K6a, respiratory insufficiency can on occasion become life-threatening, requiring emergent surgical intervention to re-establish the airway. The surgical procedures are repeated as necessary to maintain an open airway; however, surgical procedures to the larynx aimed at improving hoarseness should be avoided as they may tend to worsen the condition.

Cysts. Steatocystoma multiplex and other pilosebaceous cysts can be treated by incision with a number 11 blade and subsequent expression of the contents of the cyst (“incision and drainage”). Oral antibiotics may be indicated in the case of secondary infection. A culture should be obtained if infection is a consideration. Intralesional injection of steroid (e.g., triamcinolone) may reduce inflammation of the area if infection is not suspected. If necessary, cysts can be excised.

Failure to thrive. Poor feeding in infancy has been reported to be ameliorated by the use of a soft nipple with an enlarged opening to reduce the sucking required. All cases of ‘failure to thrive’ and poor feeding in infancy have been found to be type PC-K6a.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



There are no known effective measures to prevent the primary manifestations of PC. Consistent, regular care of the conditions is necessary. Reduction of trauma, friction, and shear forces to the skin and nails does little to reduce symptoms.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Infection of the skin and nails following grooming or trauma is the most common secondary complication seen in PC.

Pre- and post-grooming hygiene and use of clean instruments minimizes this complication.

Antibiotics may be indicated when infection occurs.

A simple ‘bleach bath’ regimen using a mild bleach solution can help prevent infections.

Surveillance



In general, individuals with PC have no known associated systemic diseases or predispositions that require routine surveillance.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Some report that higher temperatures and higher humidity worsen the condition.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



Molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives in a family with PC is not indicated because the phenotype is readily observed from a young age and no interventions can prevent the development of manifestations or reduce their severity.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Increased risk to the fetus during pregnancy has not been reported.

For a pregnant woman with PC, weight gain (increasing stress on the plantar surface) or altered hormonal environment during pregnancy may worsen the painful plantar keratoderma.

Therapies Under Investigation



A study is underway to determine whether any specific procedures make a difference in nail regrowth for PC

In 2014, a Phase 1b clinical trial sponsored by PC Project and TransDerm is underway using topical sirolimus. This 15-patient study is being conducted by Joyce Teng at Stanford University. Background research for this trial was previously published [Hickerson et al 2009].

A study is underway to determine whether any specific procedures make a difference in nail regrowth for PC (2014).

siRNA can selectively block expression of a specific K6a pathogenic variant [Hickerson et al 2008, Leachman et al 2008]. The siRNA trial included treatment of a single individual with a specific KRT6A pathogenic variant in a dose-escalation trial of an siRNA directed against the p.Asn171Lys mutated allele [Leachman et al 2010].

Botulinum toxin has been used in several patients [Swartling & Vahlquist 2006, Swartling et al 2010]. In addition to these published investigations, a number of individuals have been treated. A proposal is now being prepared for a unified study using botulinum toxin on persons with confirmed PC. No further information has been developed on topical botulinum toxin although this approach is of interest.

Several persons have been treated with statins. The results from studies are mixed. Further research is being conducted and additional animal testing is proposed [Zhao et al 2011].

Other therapies currently under investigation include anti-TNF biologics, duloxetine or duloxetine and a tricyclic combination, gabapentin, topical gabapentin, and capsaicin injections.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.