http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pjs

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and need for clinical follow up in an individual diagnosed with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS), the following initial evaluations are recommended:

Upper endoscopy plus small bowel examination (MR enterography or wireless capsule endoscopy) beginning at age eight years or when symptoms occur

Colonoscopy beginning at age eight years

In women, gynecologic and breast examinations and (after age 18 years) MRI

In men, testicular examination and testicular ultrasound examination, if clinically indicated

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor

Treatment of Manifestations



Polyps. Once the burden of gastrointestinal polyps has been established by endoscopy and imaging studies, prophylactic polypectomy of polyps >1cm is performed. This strategy has two goals:

To decrease the sequelae of large polyps including bleeding, anemia, obstruction, and intussusception

To reduce the risk for cancer by the malignant transformation of PJS-type polyps

The luminal polyp-related complications arise in childhood whereas cancer in PJS is typically seen in adulthood. Some evidence indicates that routine endoscopy and intraoperative enteroscopy with polypectomy decreases the frequency of emerging laparotomy and bowel loss [Pennazio & Rossini 2000, Edwards et al 2003, Oncel et al 2004]. From St. Mark’s PJS registry of 51 affected individuals who underwent surveillance endoscopies, none had emergency surgical interventions and no GI luminal cancers were diagnosed [Latchford et al 2011]. In surveillance endoscopies in affected individuals by age 18 years, 17/28 had large gastroduodenal or colonic polyps (>1 cm). These studies demonstrate that endoscopic surveillance and polypectomy in PJS is safe.

Distal small-bowel polyps that are beyond the reach of conventional endoscopy have been difficult to manage. Until recently, barium contrast upper-gastrointestinal series with a small-bowel follow through has been recommended. However, recent advances allow better diagnosis and eradication of small-bowel polyps, oftentimes without laparotomy and with a decrease in the radiation burden related to frequent surveillance:

Video capsule endoscopy (VCE) allows for better visualization of the small-bowel polyps than barium x-rays and is recommended as a first-line surveillance procedure. In children, the capsule can be deployed in the duodenum after upper endoscopy [Parsi & Burke 2004, Burke et al 2005, Mata et al 2005, Schulmann et al 2005]. See Note.

Magnetic resonance enterography (MRE) is a reliable procedure for the detection of larger small-bowel polyps with similar sensitivity to VCE and avoids the radiation exposure of CT enterography [Caspari et al 2004, Gupta et al 2010]. CT and MR enteroclysis are alternative procedures but are less well tolerated. See Note.

Balloon-assisted enteroscopy can remove distal small-bowel polyps with or without laparotomy [Ohmiya et al 2005, Ross et al 2006, Gao et al 2010]. Safety in those with PJS has been demonstrated in a few studies. Balloon-assisted enteroscopy and polypectomy should decrease the need for intraoperative enteroscopy or enterotomy, and should be reserved for affected individuals with many large and distal small-bowel polyps.

Note: (1) VCE was preferred by individuals and detected more large polyps than MRE [Urquhart et al 2014]. (2) In three individuals in a study by Gupta et al [2010], MRE detected polyps >15 mm that were not detected by VCE.

Intussusception should be treated in a standard manner.

Malignancies should be treated in a standard manner. Conservative management of gonadal tumors in males and females is appropriate.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Although not specifically studied in PJS, prophylactic mastectomy may be considered to manage the increased risk for breast cancer based on the family history or other clinical factors. Prophylactic hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy to prevent gynecologic malignancy in women may be considered. In some disorders with a high risk for malignancy (e.g., HNPCC), evidence supports this strategy [Schmeler et al 2006].

Surveillance



The surveillance program for the multiple organs at risk for cancer is outlined in Table 4. Note: The effect of such surveillance on morbidity and mortality has not been evaluated in controlled trials.

From birth, an annual history and physical examination with attention to testicular examination and routine blood work is recommended. A boy age 13 years with PJS was recently described as developing an unusually early presentation of small-bowel adenocarcinoma, thus supporting screening in childhood as illustrated in Table 4 [Wangler et al 2013].


Table 4. 

Screening and Surveillance Guidelines for Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome




Site
Procedure
Age at Initial Screening (yrs)
Interval





Stomach

Upper endoscopy
8, 18 1
3 years 1



Small intestine

Capsule endoscopy or MRE 2
8, 18 3
3 years



Large intestine

Colonoscopy
8, 18 1
3 years 1



Breast

Breast self-examination
18
Monthly


Clinical breast exam

6 months


Breast MRI or digital mammography 4, 5, 6
25
1 year



Ovary, cervix, uterus

Transvaginal ultrasound & serum CA 125;pelvic exam w/pap smear 6
18-20
1 year



Pancreas

MRI-MRCP or endoscopic ultrasound
30
1-2 years



Testes

Testicular exam; ultrasound if symptomatic or abnormality on exam
Birth to teenage years
1 year





Adapted from Syngal et al [2015]


MRE = magnetic resonance enterography


MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography


1. 
If significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat upper endoscopy/colonoscopy every three years. If no significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat at age 18 years and then every three years.


2. 
CT enterography may be used as an alternative. The use of MR enterography allows for simultaneous surveillance for pancreatic cancer.


3. 
If few or no polyps at baseline, repeat at age 18 years.


4. 
Digital mammography if MRI not available


5. 
Discuss prophylactic mastectomy.


6. 
Discuss prophylactic hysterectomy and oophorectomy.



Screening and Surveillance Guidelines for Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome

Adapted from Syngal et al [2015]

MRE = magnetic resonance enterography

MRCP = magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography

If significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat upper endoscopy/colonoscopy every three years. If no significant polyps are present at baseline, repeat at age 18 years and then every three years.

CT enterography may be used as an alternative. The use of MR enterography allows for simultaneous surveillance for pancreatic cancer.

If few or no polyps at baseline, repeat at age 18 years.

Digital mammography if MRI not available

Discuss prophylactic mastectomy.

Discuss prophylactic hysterectomy and oophorectomy.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



No agents that increase the risk for polyp development or for cancers have been described.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is known, it is appropriate to offer molecular genetic testing for the known pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant to at-risk relatives. Morbidity and mortality can be reduced in those individuals identified to have the family-specific variant by means of:

Early diagnosis and treatment;

Surveillance as outlined in Surveillance.

If the pathogenic variant in the family is not known, it is appropriate to offer:

Clinical diagnostic evaluations to identify those family members who will benefit from early treatment;

Surveillance as outlined in Surveillance to all first-degree relatives whether or not they meet diagnostic criteria.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Other



Several animal models of PJS have been generated using STK11 knockout mice [Karuman et al 2001, Bardeesy et al 2002, Miyoshi et al 2002, Nakau et al 2002, Wei et al 2005]. Gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyposis in STK11+/– mice mimics human PJS polyps with the unique smooth muscle arborization. In these animal models, upregulation of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in polyp tissue was noted [Rossi et al 2002]. Overexpression of COX-2 in human PJS hamartomas and PJS-associated cancers has also been detected [McGarrity et al 2003, Wei et al 2003]. COX-2 inhibition in mice using celecoxib suppresses polyp growth [Udd et al 2004]. Polyp burden in STK11 (Lkb1) heterozygous (+/–) knockout mice was reduced by 86% among mice who had developed polyps and were then treated with 1500-ppm celecoxib.

Selective COX-2 inhibitors have been approved for the prevention of colorectal polyps in familial adenomatous polyposis [Lynch 2010]; to date, however, no clinical trials in the US are studying efficacy of COX-2 inhibitors in reducing polyp formation in individuals with PJS. Increased cardiovascular and cerebrovascular adverse events with selective COX-2 inhibitors limit their use.

Observation of hyperactivation of mTOR in hereditary harmartoma syndrome and a variety of cancers suggests that mTOR inhibitors may be useful in the management of PJS [van Veelen et al 2011]. Wei et al [2008] and Wei et al [2009] reported significant reduction in tumor burden in STK11+/– mice treated with rapamycin compared with that in mice without rapamycin treatment. Treatment begun before the onset of polyposis resulted in more dramatic reduction than treatment begun after onset. In another study in STK11+/– mice oral rapamycin intake was associated with a significant reduction in microvessel growth in polyps as well as in tumor burden [Robinson et al 2009].

In addition, in two small trials in persons with tuberous sclerosis complex, treatment with rapamycin induced regression of the astrocytomas [Franz et al 2006] and reduced facial angiofibroma [Hofbauer et al 2008]. Whether rapamycin would decrease polyp growth in PJS has not been documented in human studies. The mTOR inhibitor, everolimus, caused partial regression of a pancreatic cancer in an individual with PJS. Induction of apoptosis in colon polyps was also noted [Klümpen et al 2011].

These findings suggest that mTOR inhibitors are an option to investigate for management of polyposis in PJS.