http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/porphyria-var

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual diagnosed with variegate porphyria (VP), the following evaluations are recommended:

Degree of elevations on plasma and urine porphyrins and urine PBG, if not determined at the time of diagnosis

Effects of VP on the skin, nervous system, liver, and kidneys

Contributions of medications, diet, and concurrent conditions on VP

Treatment of Manifestations



Neurovisceral Symptoms



Most acute neurovisceral attacks require hospital admission; patients with mild attacks (not requiring narcotic analgesics and without hyponatremia, seizures, or muscle weakness) are sometimes treated as outpatients. A rapid, thorough, and multidisciplinary evaluation is optimized by in-patient management.

As with other acute porphyrias, evaluation should include identification of exacerbating drugs and other precipitating factors. Harmful medications include barbiturates, sulfonamide antibiotics, griseofulvin, rifampin, most anticonvulsants including phenytoin and carbamazepine, alcohol, ergot alkaloids, metoclopramide, and progestins. Harmful medications should be discontinued.

Seizures, motor neuropathy, and hyponatremia suggest severe disease and should be managed in the ICU with adequate supportive treatment.

Narcotic analgesics are usually required for pain and ondansetron or a related drug for nausea and vomiting. A phenothiazine is also effective for nausea and for psychiatric symptoms (e.g., agitation, hallucinations) [Anderson et al 2005, Harper & Wahlin 2007].

Mild attacks (not requiring narcotics and without hyponatremia, seizures, or motor neuropathy) can be treated with glucose loading, but most attacks should be treated with intravenous hemin [Anderson et al 2005].

Note: ‘Hemin’ refers to the oxidized form of iron protoporphyrin IX, but is also the generic term for heme preparations used as intravenous therapies for acute porphyrias, such as lyophilized hematin (heme hydroxide) and heme arginate. When these hemin preparations are infused intravenously, the heme is bound to circulating albumin as heme albumin. The latter is taken up by hepatocytes and decreases the synthesis of hepatic ALAS1, the rate-controlling enzyme for heme synthesis in the liver.

Patients with acute attack should be carefully monitored for muscle weakness and respiratory impairment that may require ventilatory support.

Hyponatremia should be corrected slowly and seizures treated with medications that do not exacerbate porphyria.

Liver transplantation, which has been effective in persons with AIP with severe repeated acute attacks that respond poorly to medical therapy, is a consideration in VP [Dowman et al 2012].

Cutaneous Symptoms



Porphyrin levels may decrease and photosensitivity improve if exacerbating factors can be identified and removed. Otherwise there is no effective treatment that lowers porphyrin levels. Treatment with hemin may lower porphyrins in the short term only.

Patients should wear protective clothing and avoid exposure to sunlight.

Analgesics may be needed for painful lesions and antibiotics for superimposed infection. Topical steroids are of little or no benefit.

Specific measures effective in the treatment of porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) (i.e., phlebotomy and low-dose hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine) are not effective in the management of VP.

Prevention of Primary Manifestations




Acute attack

Attacks are less likely to occur in the future if exacerbating factors are corrected or avoided.

Recurrent premenstrual attacks of acute porphyrias, including VP, can be prevented with GnRH analogues [Anderson et al 1990].

Weekly or biweekly hemin infusions may prevent frequent noncyclical attacks; however, published experience is lacking.

Photocutaneous. Prevention of the skin manifestations of VP requires protection from sunlight.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Progression of renal disease may be prevented to some degree by controlling hypertension.

Surveillance



Hepatocellular carcinoma may develop especially after age 50 years in patients with acute porphyrias and persistent elevations in porphobilinogen or porphyrins; liver imaging at six-month intervals beginning at age 50 years may detect early lesions [Andant et al 2000, Schneider-Yin et al 2010].

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Precipitating factors that should be avoided include: barbiturates, sulfonamide antibiotics, griseofulvin, rifampin, most anticonvulsants including phenytoin and carbamazepine, alcohol, ergot alkaloids, metoclopramide, and progestins. Updated lists are maintained at the Web sites of the American Porphyria Foundation and the European Porphyria Network.

Although birth control pills should generally be avoided, low-dose hormonal preparations may be tolerated.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



At-risk family members can be offered molecular genetic testing for the family-specific PPOX pathogenic variant to identify PPOX heterozygotes for counseling regarding appropriate use of drugs and avoidance of known precipitating factors.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.

Pregnancy Management



Pregnancy is usually well tolerated but some women heterozygous for a PPOX pathogenic variant may experience exacerbations.

Badminton & Deybach [2006] published an anecdotal report of successful treatment of several pregnant women experiencing attacks of VP or other acute porphyrias during pregnancy with hemin (in the form of heme arginate) without adverse fetal effect. They emphasize that interruption of pregnancy is almost never indicated for management of acute porphyria.

Experience with heme hydroxide is also limited but suggests no adverse effects during pregnancy [Isenschmid et al 1992]. As noted (see Treatment of Manifestations, Neurovisceral Symptoms, Note), hemin is delivered to tissues as heme albumin when administered as either heme arginate or heme hydroxide, and these preparations are expected to have similar safety profiles.

A fetus heterozygous for a PPOX pathogenic variant has a good prognosis, because most heterozygotes never develop symptoms and treatment for attacks is generally effective.