http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pph

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



Because pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a diagnosis of exclusion, the necessary evaluations are typically all completed as part of establishing the diagnosis.

A medical genetics consultation is recommended.

Treatment of Manifestations



See McLaughlin et al [2013], Taichman et al [2014] and Hill et al [2015] for evidenced-based treatment algorithms.

Referral centers specializing in diagnosis and therapy of PAH are available across the US (see Pulmonary Hypertension Association Web site). Consultation is encouraged for all persons suspected of having PAH because of the complexity and continuing evolution of diagnosis and treatment.

Unprecedented approval of medications for PAH by the FDA in the last two decades has led to availability of a dozen therapies which all demonstrate some efficacy, but substantial limitations remain: none of them cures the disease, nor is effective in all patients, nor stops or reverses the underlying pathogenesis (obstruction of the pulmonary arteries).

The most effective among them, continuous IV prostanoids, are the most complicated to administer as they require patient management of a pump for continuous infusion, with a myriad of possible problems, including sepsis related to chronic central venous catheters. Patient preference often dictates the route of medication administration (continuous IV or subcutaneous (subQ), aerosol, oral) or side effects determine which agents are personally acceptable.

Continuous patient monitoring for progression of disease and medication adjustment requires a dedicated multidisciplinary team which communicates seamlessly with multiple specialty pharmacies and insurors.

Medications in use for PAH include the following:

Prostacyclin analogsEpoprostenol (continuous IV)Treprostinil (inhalation, oral, continuous subQ, or IV)Iloprost (inhalation)

Endothelin blockers (oral)BosentanAmbrisenanMacitentan

Phosphodiesterase inhibitors (oral)SildenafilTadalafil

Guanylate cyclase stimulator (oral)Riociguat

Calcium channel blockers. A minority of individuals with PAH have a favorable long-term clinical response to oral calcium channel blockers. Such responders may be identified by a positive acute pulmonary vasodilator response (inhaled nitric oxide) assessed during cardiac catheterization. Three retrospective studies suggest that individuals with HPAH are less likely to demonstrate an acute pulmonary vasodilator response or have more severe disease than those with PAH of unknown cause [Elliott et al 2006, Rosenzweig et al 2008, Sztrymf et al 2008].

Adjunctive agents. Fluid retention may be ameliorated by diuretic therapy, hypoxemia may be helped by supplemental oxygen, and anticoagulation therapy may prevent superimposed thrombosis, especially common for indwelling catheters needed to deliver continuous infusion of a prostanoid.

Lung transplantation is an effective treatment for selected patients with PAH, but has many limitations, among them insufficient availability of donor lungs and limited long-term survival after lung transplantation for most recipients because of chronic graft rejection. Mean survival after lung transplantation is about five years.

Lung transplantation is appropriate only for patients whose lives are threatened by lung disease. Although the many effective PAH medications can improve symptoms, they do not reverse the underlying pulmonary vascular disease and it is debated how much they prolong overall survival [Humbert 2010, Macchia et al 2010]. The time span of months usually needed to assess the benefit of the many different medications or combinations of medications can delay the decision about timing of lung transplantation.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Fluid balance. Fluid retention is a common complication and requires vigilant management and interaction with health care team.

Patients should weigh daily and chart their weights, and be instructed about what threshold to call for change in therapy.

Exercise regimen. A regular exercise regimen is desirable, and is tailored to the patient depending on their stage of disease. Exercise is valuable for restoration and maintenance of physical conditioning, but at the same time is a monitor for change in status of the PAH indicating need for a change in therapy.

Nutrition management. Many of the medications are associated with side effects of anorexia or nausea, so careful attention to nutritional status is needed to maintain overall health.

Infusion pump management. Maintaining and troubleshooting of continuous infusions of vasoactive medications requires extensive training and disaster preparation of both the patient and a care support person. Initial training requires 20 hours of in-person teaching per patient, and meticulous attention to detail is essential for therapy to be successful.

Central venous catheter. Maintaining and troubleshooting catheters requires meticulous attentive care to be done safely.

Surveillance



See McLaughlin et al [2013] for consensus document, including Reassessing Patients Over Time.

The clinical course of HPAH is highly variable, ranging from rapid progression to long periods of stable clinical status. The appropriate surveillance measures and timing are determined by the relative stability of the patient's clinical condition. Patients who are declining should be in frequent contact with their health care providers so that therapies may be changed or added.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Individuals with or at risk for PAH should avoid all the following:

Appetite-suppressant medications (e.g., fenfluramine/phentermine, dexfenfluramine, and amfepramone [diethylpropion]), which have been associated with pulmonary hypertension (PH) [Abenhaim et al 1996, Abramowicz et al 2003]

Cocaine, amphetamines, and related compounds causing vasoconstriction, which have anecdotal association with PH and could be risk factors

Other medications that have anecdotal suggestion of increased risk of PH, including estrogen compounds used as oral contraceptives or hormone replacement therapy. Anecdotal reports associating pregnancy with onset of PH raise some concern about the risks involved with pregnancy; however, there is no published consensus regarding the best approach to birth control in women with PAH. Because avoidance of exogenous systemic estrogen is desirable, many experts prefer IUD [Austin et al 2009a, Sweeney & Voelkel 2009].

Hypoxia. The hypoxia that accompanies high altitude is associated with pulmonary vasoconstriction and PH in susceptible individuals.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures.

The WHO Symposia [Badesch et al 2009] recommends serial screening by echocardiography of at-risk family members every three to five years to enable earlier detection and treatment. However, many health insurers do not provide coverage for screening tests for asymptomatic individuals. No studies describe the frequency of compliance with the WHO recommendation.

In families with a known pathogenic variant in one of the genes known to be associated with HPAH, the use of molecular genetic testing to clarify the genetic status of at-risk relatives can allow individuals who do not have the family-specific pathogenic variant to safely forego clinical screening. However, the role of molecular genetic testing for early diagnosis of at-risk family members has yet to be established [Newman et al 2001].

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



The physiologic stress of pregnancy in a woman with HPAH is significant and maternal mortality is believed to be substantial; newer effective therapies may decrease the risk.

Anecdotal reports of onset of PAH with pregnancy raise concern about risks of pregnancy as a basis for developing PAH, but no consensus exists regarding the best approach to birth control in women with HPAH [Austin et al 2009a, Sweeney & Voelkel 2009].

Therapies Under Investigation



Several investigations are actively seeking new treatment directions or compounds, and many have shown promising results in experimental models or pilot studies in affected individuals, including the following [Ghofrani et al 2009]:

Antiangiogenesis strategies

Growth factor inhibitors

Endothelial progenitor cells/stem cells in lung repair

Developing therapies against right-ventricle remodeling

Trials of combination therapy, using selected combinations of the FDA-approved therapies mentioned in Treatment of Manifestations, are in progress [Gomberg-Maitland et al 2013]

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.