http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/pxe

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis 



To establish the extent of disease in an individual diagnosed with pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), the following assessments are recommended:

Complete skin examination, including a biopsy of potentially lesional skin from the axilla or neck. A von Kossa or similar histologic stain for calcium should be done on the biopsy to confirm the diagnosis, although PXE can be strongly suspected on skin biopsy even without special stains.

Complete dilated eye examination by a retinal specialist, particularly looking for peau d'orange and angioid streaks. A fluorescein angiogram may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis.

Baseline cardiovascular examination with periodic follow-up for individuals with pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), including (as clinically indicated based on age, physical findings, and exercise level):

Echocardiography

Cardiac stress testing

Doppler evaluation of peripheral vasculature

Treatment of Manifestations



No specific treatment for PXE exists.

Management of PXE requires coordinated input from a multidisciplinary team of specialists including a dermatologist, primary care physician, ophthalmologist, cardiologist, vascular surgeon, plastic surgeon, genetics professional, and nutritionist. Support groups can benefit affected individuals and their families by providing accurate information and education and reducing isolation.

Current treatment for macular degeneration, especially the intraocular injection of anti-angiogenic drugs, also appears to be effective in PXE [Finger et al 2011]. A retinal specialist should be consulted immediately when the individual experiences any distortion in vision.

Surgical or radiologic intervention may be indicated for gastrointestinal bleeding, severe peripheral vascular disease (if correctable), and the improvement of changes of the skin of the face, neck, axilla, and groin that are of cosmetic concern. Although wound healing seems to be uncomplicated in PXE, cosmetic acceptability of surgery involving the skin is less predictable, although generally good [Viljoen et al 1990].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



Weight control, avoidance of smoking, and aggressive management of hypertension and lipid disorders may reduce the risk of vascular complications by reducing the risk of comorbidity resulting from atherosclerosis. However, reduction in risk resulting from these measures has not been confirmed in controlled studies.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Individuals with PXE who have coexistent mitral valve prolapse should have antibiotic prophylaxis for dental, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary procedures.

Surveillance



The following are appropriate:

Regular examination by an ophthalmologist with expertise in retinal disease. Affected individuals benefit from learning to use the Amsler grid to monitor for central visual disturbances.

Regular physical examination with specific attention to the cardiovascular system

Monitoring by the affected individual for black tarry stool

Periodic monitoring of serum lipid concentrations

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Racquet and contact sports carry an increased risk for ocular and head trauma, both of which have been reported to precipitate retinal hemorrhage in patients with angioid streaks; participation in such activities should be discouraged.

Individuals with PXE who participate in sports and physical recreation should wear appropriate protective eyewear such as polycarbonate sports goggles and/or protective helmets with eye shields.

Aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications should be avoided whenever possible to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal bleeding.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



In the series of Bercovitch et al [2004], there was no statistically significant effect of gravidity on the severity of skin, eye, cardiac, or peripheral vascular manifestations of PXE in women over 40. In addition, women over 40 with PXE who had been pregnant did not have more severe skin, cardiac, ocular, or vascular manifestations of PXE than those who had never been pregnant. Except for the consequences of severe maternal gastrointestinal hemorrhage, which appears to be uncommon, PXE has no known significant effect on the fetus. Retinal examination during pregnancy and prompt attention to any visual symptoms are advised.

Therapies Under Investigation



Based on animal studies [Larusso et al 2009, Li et al 2009c], magnesium supplementation has been proposed as a treatment to prevent progression of elastic tissue mineralization in PXE. A randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial to study the effect of magnesium oxide supplementation is beginning in 2012.

Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions.

Other



It has been reported that high calcium intake in adolescence may correlate with the overall severity of PXE [Renie et al 1984]; however, this has never been confirmed by prospective controlled studies and thus remains unproven and controversial.

The AREDS study for macular degeneration suggested that a regimen of antioxidant vitamins could prove beneficial in that disease [Clemons et al 2004]. While it is possible that this could also be the case for PXE, it has not been reported and remains unproven.