http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/sds

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs of an individual following the initial diagnosis of Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS), current consensus practice typically recommends the following evaluations to assess the status of the pancreas, liver, bone marrow, and skeleton [Dror et al 2011]; discussions to update recommendations are ongoing.

Assessment of growth: height, weight in relation to age

Assessment of nutritional status to determine if supplementation with pancreatic enzymes is necessary and/or effective:

Measurement of fat-soluble vitamins (vitamin A, 25-OH-vitamin D, and vitamin E) or their related metabolites

Measurement of prothrombin time (to detect vitamin K deficiency)

Assessment of serum concentration of the digestive enzyme cationic trypsinogen and, if sufficiency is observed, subsequent confirmation with a 72-hour fecal fat balance study (with discontinuation of enzyme supplementation for at least a 24-hour period)

Pancreatic imaging by ultrasound

Complete blood count with white cell differential and platelet count at three- to six-month intervals (or more often as clinically indicated)

Bone marrow examination with biopsy and cytogenetic studies at initial assessment

Skeletal survey with radiographs of at least the hips and lower limbs

Bone densitometry as clinically indicated

Assessment of serum aminotransferase levels

Assessment of developmental milestones (including pubertal development) with neuropsychological evaluation

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



A multidisciplinary team including specialists from the following fields is recommended: hematology, gastroenterology, medical genetics, orthopedics, endocrinology, immunology, dentistry, child development, psychology, and social work as needed [Dror & Freedman 2002, Rothbaum et al 2002, Durie & Rommens 2004, Dror et al 2011, Myers et al 2013a].

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency can be treated with the same oral pancreatic enzymes commonly used in treatment of cystic fibrosis; dose should be based on results of routine assessment of pancreatic function and nutritional status. Steatorrhea often resolves in early childhood, but pancreatic enzyme levels can remain low; routine monitoring (see Surveillance) is recommended.

Supplementation with fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) is recommended.

Blood and/or platelet transfusions may be considered for anemia and bi- or trilineage cytopenia.

Hematologic abnormalities. If recurrent infections are severe and absolute neutrophil counts are persistently 500/mm3 or less, treatment with prophylactic antibiotics and granulocyte-colony stimulation factor (G-CSF) can be considered.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) should be considered for treatment of severe pancytopenia, bone marrow transformation to myelodysplastic syndrome, or AML. Chemotherapy can be utilized as a bridge to HSCT in individuals with SDS and AML; however, sustained complete remission is problematic and prompt continuation to HSCT remains imperative. Although earlier reports indicate that survival is fair, cautious myeloablation and newer reduced intensity regimens have demonstrated improved outcomes in small cohorts [Cesaro et al 2005, Vibhakar et al 2005, Sauer et al 2007, Bhatla et al 2008].

Note: Bone marrow abnormalities are not treated unless severe aplasia, myelodysplastic changes, or leukemic transformation are present.

Skeletal abnormalities. Skeletal manifestations of SDS may range from clinically asymptomatic to severe, and can evolve or progress over time. Severe manifestations such as asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy due to rib cage restriction will require subspecialty care including pediatric pulmonary and orthopedic specialists. Other rib and joint abnormalities may require surgical intervention if severe and consultation with an orthopedic surgeon familiar with SDS for those with skeletal dysplasia may be beneficial.

Growth. Children with poor growth and delayed puberty benefit from ongoing consultation with an endocrinologist, who may also consult with orthopedists regarding possible surgical management of asymmetric growth and joint deformities.


Other

Bone densitometry should be considered if clinically indicated, or in early adulthood.

Cognitive, learning, and behavioral complications can be features of SDS, and remedial interventions are considered beneficial.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



Frequent dental visits to monitor tooth development and oral health are recommended to reduce the incidence of mouth ulcers and gingivitis. Home care should include aggressive dental hygiene with topical fluoride treatments to help prevent dental decay.

Prophylactic antibiotics and G-CSF may be especially helpful when interventions such as complex dental procedures or orthopedic surgery are being considered.

Surveillance



The following is recommended given the intermittent nature of some features of SDS and the evolution of the phenotype over time [Rothbaum et al 2002, Dror et al 2011, Myers et al 2013a]:

Complete blood counts with white blood cell differential and platelet counts at least every three to six months, or more frequently if peripheral blood counts are changing or infections are recurrent and debilitating

Developmental assessment every six months from birth to age six years and growth every six months.

Assessment of nutritional status every six months and measurement of serum concentration of vitamins to evaluate effectiveness of or need for pancreatic enzyme therapy

Repeat bone marrow examinations every one to three years following the baseline examination, and more frequently if changes in bone marrow function or cellularity are observed.

Monitoring for orthopedic complications with x-rays of hips and knees during the most rapid growth stages

Bone densitometry before puberty, during puberty, and thereafter based on individual findings. Results must be interpreted in the context of stature and pubertal status.

Neuropsychological screening in children age 6-8 years, 11-13 years, and 15-17 years

Note: Discussions to update and maintain recommendations are ongoing.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Prolonged use of cytokine and hematopoietic growth factors such as G-CSF is cautioned against in view of their potential contribution to leukemic transformation [Rosenberg et al 2006].

Some drugs (e.g., cyclophosphamide and busulfan) used in standard HSCT preparative regimens may not be suitable because of possible cardiac toxicity [Mitsui et al 2004, Cesaro et al 2005, Vibhakar et al 2005, Sauer et al 2007].

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to evaluate as early as possible the older and younger sibs of a proband in order to identify those who will benefit from treatment and preventive measures. This can also potentially prevent asymptomatic affected sibs from being used as bone marrow transplant donors.

If the SBDS pathogenic variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing can be used to clarify the genetic status of at-risk sibs.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



For pregnancies in women with SDS, high-risk pregnancy care including consultation with a hematologist is recommended [Alter et al 1999].

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.