http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/urofacial

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with urofacial syndrome (UFS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Urinalysis and urine culture for occult or chronic infection

Assessment of renal function: serum creatinine concentration and/or estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR)

Urinary tract ultrasound examination

Micturating cystourethrogram

Uroflowmetry or urodynamic testing

Blood pressure measurement

Assessment of renal parenchymal damage: as indicated by the individual’s presentation, dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) isotope scan to visualize functional kidney parenchyma [Ochoa 2004, Aydogdu et al 2010, Stuart et al 2013]

Assessment of bowel voiding

Medical genetics consultation

Treatment of Manifestations



Urinary tract. No evidence base exists for treatment of the urinary tract abnormalities of UFS.

Urinary tract infections warrant rapid and complete treatment. Urosepsis should be treated as per the general population with antibiotic use directed by culture; antibiotic prophylaxis may also be considered.

Anticholinergic and α1-adrenergic blockers have been used in the medical management of urinary incontinence and bladder dysfunction [Aydogdu et al 2010, Stuart et al 2013].

Intermittent catheterization or vesicostomy to reduce residual urine volumes and achieve continence with a reduced risk of infections have been used.

Surgical management of hydroureteronephrosis and bladder augmentation to slow progression of renal impairment have been used; their efficacy is not known [Ochoa 2004, Stuart et al 2013].

Early recognition of renal impairment should initiate intensive management to prevent or slow progression. Renal impairment and hypertension are managed as per clinical status. Successful renal transplantation has been reported [Ochoa 2004].

Bowel. Constipation is managed as for the general population.

Surveillance



Monitor for evidence of urinary tract features including vesicoureteric reflux (VUR) and hydroureteronephrosis. Renal function should be monitored at intervals determined by urinary tract features at presentation and their subsequent progression.

Agents/Circumstances to Avoid



Nephrotoxic substances contraindicated in individuals with renal impairment should be avoided if possible.

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to examine sibs of an affected individual as soon as possible after birth to determine if facial and/or urinary tract manifestations of UFS are present to allow prompt evaluation of the urinary tract and renal function and prompt initiation of necessary treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Pregnancy Management



Although no guidelines for prenatal management of UFS exist, it seems appropriate to perform ultrasound examination of pregnancies at risk to determine if urinary tract involvement of UFS is present, as it may influence the timing and/or location of delivery (e.g., in a tertiary medical center that could manage renal/urinary complications immediately after birth).

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.