http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/n/gene/xlhi

Management



Evaluations Following Initial Diagnosis



Following the diagnosis of X-linked hyper IgM syndrome (HIGM1), the GI and respiratory tracts should be evaluated for overt or occult infections.

Treatment of Manifestations



The only curative treatment currently available for HIGM1 is allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT), ideally prior to onset of a life-threatening complication and organ damage [Levy et al 1997]. Currently, boys with HIGM1 who receive allogeneic HCT have a 70%-75% long-term survival rate [Tomizawa et al 2004, Tsuji et al 2006]. Modified conditioning regimens prior to HCT may be necessary in individuals with preexisting liver disease [Dogu et al 2011].

For a concise summary of current clinical management practices in this disorder, see Davies & Thrasher [2010].


Other

Total parenteral nutrition may be required.

Treat chronic neutropenia with recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF).

Institute appropriate antimicrobial therapy for infections.

Aggressively evaluate pulmonary infections, including the use of diagnostic bronchoalveolar lavage, to define the specific etiology.

Some males with end-stage sclerosing cholangitis have been treated successfully with orthotropic liver transplantation closely associated with allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.

Treat lymphomas and GI cancer.

Treatment of autoimmune disorders usually involves judicious use of immunosuppressants tailored to the individual's diagnosis.

Liver disease, including primary cirrhosis and carcinomas, in addition to tumors of the gastrointestinal tract, complicate the management of older individuals with HIGM1 [Lee et al 2005].

Prevention of Primary Manifestations



The following methods are used to prevent infection:

Antibiotic prophylaxis. Prophylaxis for pneumonia secondary to Pneumocystis jiroveci (PCP) is indicated because infants with HIGM1 are at high risk of developing PCP during the first two years of life. Typical prophylaxis is Bactrim® (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) orally or pentamidine by intravenous or inhalation therapy.

Intravenous immune globulin (IVIG). IVIG replacement should be considered by the time the child is age six months, as individuals with HIGM1 cannot generate antibodies to encapsulated bacteria naturally and are at risk for overwhelming infection from these organisms. IVIG is a highly purified blood derivative (a combination of many specific antimicrobial antibodies) that is typically given every three to four weeks or can be given subcutaneously, usually on a weekly basis.

Additional antibiotic prophylaxis should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.

Routine childhood immunizations (killed vaccines) may be safely administered but do not preclude the need for IVIG replacement.

Prevention of Secondary Complications



In areas where cryptosporidium may be present in the water supply, only purified water should be ingested.

Surveillance



Monitor and treat pulmonary complications:

Annual pulmonary function tests for those older than age seven years

Follow-up of pulmonary infiltrates with a high-resolution chest CT scan, as they may represent lymphoid aggregates

Bronchoscopic evaluations as indicated

Perform annual endoscopic evaluation.

At routine visits, monitor for the following:

Chronic neutropenia

Chronic diarrhea and resulting malnutrition. If present, screen for ova and parasites.

Liver disease with biochemical liver function tests, especially in individuals with documented history of cryptosporidiosis

Lymphomas and GI cancers by history of new symptoms that could be suggestive of malignancy

Autoimmune disorders with history, physical examination, and CBC

Neurologic complications with neurologic examinations and brain MRI, as indicated

Evaluation of Relatives at Risk



It is appropriate to perform molecular genetic testing of CD40LG if the pathogenic variant in the family is known so that morbidity and mortality can be reduced by early diagnosis and treatment.

See Genetic Counseling for issues related to testing of at-risk relatives for genetic counseling purposes.

Therapies Under Investigation



Search ClinicalTrials.gov for access to information on clinical studies for a wide range of diseases and conditions. Note: There may not be clinical trials for this disorder.