Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) or bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is the only presently available therapy that attempts to treat the primary central nervous system manifestations of MLD [Krivit et al 1999, Peters & Steward 2003, Krivit 2004]. Not all individuals with MLD are suitable candidates for these procedures and not all families are willing to undertake the risks involved. Although identification of adequately matched donors and treatments for complications of HSCT are constantly improving, it remains controversial. Substantial risk is involved and long-term effects are unclear.

However, in the absence of alternative approaches, HSCT needs to be discussed with families. This is particularly important for families with more slowly progressing late-onset forms of MLD because family members may be diagnosed with MLD by biochemical or molecular genetic testing before symptoms occur.

A number of reports on the experience of individual centers using HSCT have appeared over the past ten years: each involves a limited number of patients and few with MLD. They reflect evolving pretreatment conditioning and improved donor matching. HSCT failures continue; nevertheless, some improvement has been seen. Even when HSCT is successful, however, MLD progresses for a substantial period before implanted cells populate the central nervous system. The best clinical outcomes are obtained when transplantation occurs before clinical symptoms have appeared.

Meuleman et al [2008] reported minimal complications in an adult who underwent reduced intensity conditioning accompanied by mesenchymal stromal cell infusion.

Although the availability of hematopoietic stem cells from cord blood enhances the chances of obtaining a suitable source of donor cells, the results reported to date indicate that considerable problems remain [Martin et al 2006].

Cartier & Aubourg [2008] concluded that “…banked umbilical cord blood is still associated with significant risks of graft failure or GVHD.”

In earlier studies, HSCT for MLD appeared to slow disease progression, but not alleviate peripheral nervous system manifestations [Koç et al 2002]. More recently, however, a 13-year follow up of an individual with juvenile MLD treated with HSCT reported slow disease progression in the two years following transplantation, but subsequent stabilization [Görg et al 2007].

Pierson et al [2008] reported three sibs with MLD who were transplanted with umbilical cord blood at different stages of disease: the oldest experienced disease progression; the two younger children had stable or improved neuropsychologic, neuroimaging, and nerve conduction evaluations over a two-year period of follow up.

Tokimasa et al [2008] evaluated the feasibility of transplants from unrelated donors using a modified preparative procedure. Two persons with MLD showed complete donor chimerism and survived more than a year after transplantation.

Smith et al [2010] followed an adult with psycho-cognitive MLD for 11 years after HSCT. “Cognitive decline, indistinguishable from the natural course of the disease…” was observed.

de Hosson et al [2011] reported treatment of five patients and reviewed the literature. They conclude that in most published cases, HSCT has not been effective for MLD.

Cable et al [2011] report five-year follow up of three sibs with juvenile MLD who were transplanted with unrelated umbilical cord blood. The disease progressed over the first two years post-transplant followed by stabilization of symptoms. The overall outcome depended on the disease status at the age of transplantation with the oldest showing typical disease progression.

In a review of outcomes of persons with MLD undergoing HCST, Orchard & Tolar [2010] concluded that persons with later-onset disease may benefit and presymptomatic children with pathogenic variants typical for late-infantile onset (see Genotype-Phenotype Correlations) appear to have significant cognitive benefits; however, it is unclear if progressive motor problems will improve.

Lanfranchi et al [2009] reviewed the therapeutic use of stem cells of various origins in a variety of conditions including MLD.

HSCT in a presymptomatic neonate has been reported, but complications were encountered and disease progression was not halted [Bredius et al 2007].

For further information on the specific nursing care requirements for those with MLD who undergo HCST, see Barrell [2007].
