Dietary management. The goals of dietary management for newly diagnosed infants:

Normal weight gain, linear growth, and head growth

Normal psychomotor development, as assessed by serial examinations and valid developmental screening tools (e.g., Denver Developmental Screening Test II, standardized intelligence testing, validated behavioral inventories) [Muelly et al 2013]

Age-appropriate tolerance of leucine, isoleucine, and valine, with stable plasma BCAA concentrations and BCAA concentration ratios

Avoidance of essential amino acid, fatty acid, and micronutrient deficiencies

Home formula supplies include BCAA-free powder; breast milk or regular infant formula as a natural protein source; and 10-mg/mL solutions of isoleucine, valine, and leucine in distilled water. If the BCAA-free powder is not already fortified with glutamine and alanine [Strauss et al 2010], these can be given separately as a combined powder (weight ratio 3:2). Parents maintain a record of intake of calories, leucine, isoleucine, and valine and send dried blood spots by overnight mail for monitoring of amino acid concentrations. The frequency of amino acid monitoring varies by age, metabolic stability, compliance, and regional clinical practice. For rapidly growing infants, monitoring weekly or twice weekly is recommended. Of note, the frequency of amino acid monitoring correlates directly with long-term measures of intelligence [Muelly et al 2013].

Suggested clinical parameters for the asymptomatic infant or young child include the following:

Normal age- and weight-adjusted energy intake

Protein as essential and non-essential amino acids: 2-3 g/kg/day

Appropriate leucine tolerance. The dietary requirement for BCAAs varies as a function of age, growth rate, calorie intake, illness, and residual in vivo BCKAD enzyme activity. In persons with classic MSUD (0%-2% enzyme activity), leucine tolerance in mg/kg/day is 65-85 for neonates, 20-40 for children, and 10-15 for adults (Figure 9) [Strauss et al 2010].

Isoleucine and valine supplements as needed to maintain a plasma leucine-to-valine concentration ratio (mol:mol) of 0.5 or less and a leucine-to-isoleucine ratio of approximately 2.0. Isoleucine supplements can periodically be suspended based on plasma amino acid monitoring, but continuous valine supplementation is prudent because its low affinity for the blood-brain barrier LAT1 transporter makes it especially vulnerable to competitive inhibition by leucine [Smith & Takasato 1986] and its appropriate fortification is directly related to long-term intellectual outcome [Strauss et al 2010, Muelly et al 2013].

The authors recently compiled age-specific (birth to age 4 years) nutrient intakes for Mennonite children with classic MSUD under their care. These data are presented in Table 5, which shows mean (and 25th to 75th percentile range) intakes for energy, total protein, supplemental amino acids, omega-3 fatty acids, and select minerals at different age intervals.

Goals of laboratory monitoring:

Plasma leucine concentration: 150-300 µmol/L with an age-appropriate intake

Plasma isoleucine concentration approximately equal to plasma leucine concentration

Plasma valine concentration at least twofold plasma leucine concentration

Indices of calcium, magnesium, zinc, folate, selenium, and omega-3 essential fatty acid sufficiency

Neuropsychiatric morbidity is most effectively addressed by presymptomatic diagnosis followed by strict and consistent metabolic control [Muelly et al 2013]. Adolescents and adults with MSUD and ADHD, depression, or anxiety respond favorably to standard psychostimulant and antidepressant medications.

Thiamine treatment. The existence of "thiamine-responsive" BCKAD mutants is controversial. Nevertheless, for any person with MSUD in whom the functional consequences of the pathogenic variant(s) are unknown, a four-week trial of enteral thiamine (50-100 mg/day, divided 2x a day) is reasonable. However, it should be noted that significant changes in dietary therapy (e.g., BCAA or calorie intake) during the treatment period confounds interpretation of a specific thiamine effect.

Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) is an effective therapy for classic MSUD, with removal of dietary restrictions and complete protection from decompensations during illness [Wendel et al 1999, Bodner-Leidecker et al 2000]. Through a collaboration between University of Pittsburgh Children's Hospital and Clinic for Special Children [Strauss et al 2006], 52 individuals with classic MSUD (age 1.9-20.5 years) underwent elective orthotopic liver transplantation between 2004 and 2013. Plasma leucine, isoleucine, and valine concentrations were normal within six hours after transplantation in all individuals and remained so on an unrestricted diet. Metabolic cure was reflected by a sustained increase in weight-adjusted leucine tolerance from 10-40 mg/kg/day to more than 140 mg/kg/day, normalization of plasma concentration relationships among branched-chain and other essential and non-essential amino acids, and metabolic and clinical stability during protein loading and intercurrent illnesses [Strauss et al 2006, Mazariegos et al 2012].

Risks associated with surgery and immune suppression were similar to those in other pediatric liver transplant populations and one person developed EBV-associated post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease. Currently, disease-free survival and graft survival are 100% in this cohort of 52 patients [Mazariegos et al 2012]; however, deaths and graft failures have been reported among individuals with MSUD transplanted elsewhere during the same time period [Mazariegos, unpublished observations].

Although liver transplantation does not reverse cognitive disability or psychiatric illness in individuals with MSUD [Muelly et al 2013], it does appear to arrest progression of neurocognitive impairment [Shellmer et al 2011] and prevent life-threatening cerebral edema associated with metabolic crisis [Mazariegos et al 2012].
