Ongoing education is essential to help minimize morbidity and mortality. Education comprises a regular review of interventions including the following:

Maintaining hydration and avoiding extremes of climate

Monitoring for signs and symptoms requiring acute medical intervention

Early detection of chronic complications

Updates on new therapies

Disease-modulating therapies are discussed in several reviews [Vichinsky 2012, Kassim & DeBaun 2013, Ware et al 2017].

Chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy. The initial goal of chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy varies depending on indication but typically is to maintain the percentage of HbS <30% and suppress reticulocytosis. Chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy may be warranted for the following [Yawn et al 2014, Howard 2016, Ware et al 2017]:

Primary prevention of stroke in individuals with an abnormal transcranial Doppler

Prevention of stroke recurrence

Treatment of chronic pain refractory to other therapies

Pulmonary hypertension

Chronic renal failure

Recurrent episodes of ACS

Severe end-organ damage

Complications of chronic red blood cell transfusion therapy include: iron overload, alloimmunization, and, rarely, infection. To limit alloimmunization and transfusion reactions, extended matching of red blood cell antigens should be performed and blood products should be leuko-reduced (removal of white blood cells from the transfusion product). Red blood cells antigen matched at the full Rh locus (D, C, E) and Kell have been suggested to decrease alloimmunization rates, as well as other alleles when possible [Lasalle-Williams et al 2011]. Approaches to decrease alloimmunization in the future include obtaining a better understanding of the process of alloimmunization as well as molecular genotyping. Defining antigens molecularly has multiple benefits including the ability to type cells when serologic reagents are not available [Yazdanbakhsh et al 2012, Matteocci & Pierelli 2014].

Hydroxycarbamide (hydroxyurea), until recently the only FDA-approved therapy for SCD, is only approved for adults. Hydroxyurea benefits individuals with SCD via several mechanisms [Platt 2008, Ware 2010] including:

Induction of HbF synthesis resulting in decreased sickling and improved red-cell survival;

Reduction of white blood cell (WBC), reticulocyte and platelet counts;

Metabolism into nitric oxide, a potent vasodilator;

Overall improvement in blood flow;

Reduction of vascular inflammation.

Multiple NIH consensus statements have noted strong evidence to support its routine use in adults [Brawley et al 2008, Yawn et al 2014]. It has been demonstrated that hydroxyurea therapy is safe to use in children as young as nine months with no decrease in immune function [Ware 2010, Rogers et al 2011, Wang et al 2011, Strouse & Heeney 2012, Lederman et al 2014]. It is now very strongly recommended that every individual with S/S and S/β0-thalassemia age nine months or older be offered treatment with hydroxyurea [Yawn et al 2014]. This early initiation decreases clinical events [Thornburg et al 2012]. In addition, use of hydroxyurea has been associated with a decrease in healthcare costs [Wang et al 2013].

Hydroxyurea can have potentially significant toxicity, including myelosuppression. Individuals treated with hydroxyurea must be monitored closely with CBCs and reticulocyte counts. In order to balance the benefits with potential toxicities of hydroxyurea, many suggest a careful titration of the drug to find a dosing for each affected person that provides an appropriate reduction in WBC count without toxicity [Ware 2010, Strouse & Heeney 2012, Yawn et al 2014].

Glutamine has just received FDA approval for the prevention of acute complications in individuals age five years and older with SCD, whether on hydroxyurea or not. Due to its antioxidant properties and in vitro activity, glutamine has long been considered of potential benefit in the treatment of SCD. Though not published, a multicenter placebo-controlled clinical trial suggests that chronic use of oral glutamine can decrease the frequency of sickle cell pain-related episodes (clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01179217). Having a second FDA-approved drug opens the door to combination therapy using multiple agents.

Stem cell transplantation from a healthy donor or one with sickle cell trait can be curative in individuals with SCD and while the number of matched-sib transplants continues to rise, there is rapid evolution in the use of alternate donors. Children with SCD receiving stem cell transplantation using a matched sib donor can expect a 92% chance of cure with an overall survival of 95%. [King & Shenoy 2014, Nickel et al 2014, Walters 2015]. These phenomenal outcomes are balanced by potential long-term consequences including chronic-graft-versus host disease and infertility. There is debate now as to who should be transplanted and when. Transplanting with a matched sib early in life can subvert a life of debilitating complications and decreasing end-organ function – the latter making transplant at a later age more difficult. Notably, pediatric providers may overly worry about the risks of transplant, while not appreciating the high morbidity of sickle cell disease manifestations in adulthood. However, the comparative long-term benefits of supportive care (including hydroxyurea and improvements in sickle cell management) versus transplantation are not yet known.

Despite the great successes associated with transplantation, it is estimated that fewer than 30% of individuals with SCD have suitable matched-sib donors, few have suitable matched unrelated donors, and transplant for adults with SCD has been far more difficult due to regime-related toxicity. The field of transplantation for SCD is currently undergoing rapid expansion. Thus, the use of alternate donors (including unrelated donors and haploidentical donors) and cord blood is an active area of research [Alfraih et al 2016, Arnold et al 2016, Walters et al 2016].

Initial myeloablative regimes yielded too much toxicity for older individuals with SCD; the recent development of less toxic transplant regimens makes stem cell transplantation a more acceptable option for older individuals [Tisdale et al 2013].

While unrelated cord blood transplants are falling out of favor due to the high rate of graft failure, there is an increased use and success of haploidentical transplants, vastly broadening the number of individuals who could potentially be cured [Gluckman 2013, Tisdale et al 2013, Walters 2015, Alfraih et al 2016, Arnold et al 2016].

Gene therapy. As all allogenic transplants for SCD present a risk for graft-versus-host disease, there has been an explosion of research in gene therapy for SCD. While both gene editing and gene addition approaches are being activity pursued, only viral mediated gene therapy approaches are being used in clinical trials [Goodman & Malik 2016, Cavazzana et al 2017].

The criteria, risks, and benefits of transplantation are changing rapidly; thus, it is important for families and providers to discuss the risks and benefits with a transplantation center with expertise in SCD.
