Antibacterial prophylaxis. No randomized prospective clinical trials of antibacterial prophylaxis in persons with CGD have been performed; however, several retrospective studies suggest that trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) is effective in preventing bacterial infections. Lifelong daily antibacterial prophylaxis with oral TMP-SMX is recommended at 5 mg/kg up to 320 mg administered in two divided doses. Note: In liquid TMP-SMX the concentration of TMP is 40 mg / 5 mL and sulfamethoxazole 200 mg / 5 mL; the therapeutic dose of TMP-SMX is determined by the TMP component.

Alternatives to TMP-SMX for patients allergic to sulfonamides include trimethoprim as a single agent, dicloxacillin, cephalosporins, and fluroquinolones.

Antifungal prophylaxis. The use of azole antifungal drugs has markedly reduced the frequency and severity of fungal infections in CGD. Lifelong antifungal prophylaxis with itraconazole 5 mg/kg oral solution to a maximum of 200 mg once daily is recommended [Gallin et al 2003].

In a randomized trial, 39 patients were assigned to receive either placebo or itraconazole (100 mg/day in patients age 5-12 years; 200 mg/day in those age >13 years and weight >50 kg); only one person receiving itraconazole had a serious fungal infection compared to seven in the placebo group [Gallin et al 2003].

For those unable to tolerate itraconazole, posaconazole has been studied in the oncology setting and is likely to be effective in CGD as well [Segal et al 2005].

Of note, the primary prophylaxis used to prevent bacterial and fungal infections also has good activity against yeasts.

Immunomodulatory therapy. Interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) has become part of the prophylactic regimen in most centers in the United States; however, opinions differ on its use as primary prophylaxis and in the treatment of acute infections. The exact mechanism of IFN-gamma in CGD is not known, adding to the debate over its utility.

An international multicenter randomized prospective placebo-controlled trial showed a decrease in the rate of serious infections in the group receiving IFN-gamma (22%) versus placebo (46%) after a follow-up period of 8.9 months. This improvement was independent of age, CGD genotype, or concomitant use of other prophylactic antibiotics. Three prospective Phase IV trials showed decreased rates of infections ranging from 0.13 to 0.4 per patient year. However, one prospective study comparing treatment with TMP-SMX and itraconazole alone versus addition of IFN-gamma showed no difference in the rates of infection [Martire et al 2008].

Some practitioners use IFN-gamma only in the setting of acute infection, rather than as primary prophylaxis. The data for this are anecdotal and unimpressive. The authors typically discontinue IFN-gamma during acute infection, as its utility is unclear and the exacerbation of malaise and fever can confuse the clinical picture and alter decision making [Holland 2010].

Administration by injection, cost, and lack of familiarity with cytokine therapy all affect the use of IFN-gamma in CGD. The authors use IFN-gamma in addition to antimicrobials as prophylaxis [Holland 2010]. Dosing is based on body surface area (BSA). For BSA >0.5/m2 the dose is 50 μg/m2 subcutaneously 3x/week; for BSA ≤0.5/m2 the dose is 1.5 μg/kg subcutaneously 3x/week. Fever, myalgias, and malaise are the most common side effects but can be alleviated with concurrent administration of acetaminophen.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Allogeneic HSCT is the only known cure for CGD. Historically, HSCT has been associated with high morbidity and mortality and thus reluctantly offered. However, the use of non-myeloablative conditioning regimens has greatly decreased the risk of regimen-related toxicity as well as allowing for transplantation in the setting of active infection; recent reports place transplant survival at greater than 90% [Güngör et al 2014] with roughly equal survival among patients with matched related, matched unrelated, and umbilical cord blood donors.

The issue of which individuals with CGD should undergo HSCT remains complex. While transplant-related mortality rates have fallen dramatically and successful cure has risen, issues of long-term risk, sterility, graft-versus-host disease, donor matching, expense, center experience, availability, and insurance coverage all strongly influence family and physician choices regarding transplantation. Levels of residual superoxide production have correlated well with overall survival [Kuhns et al 2010]; that is, individuals with very low superoxide production had worse long-term survival than those with higher levels of residual superoxide production, suggesting that this latter group could benefit more from transplantation. However, even within this group some patients do relatively well for long periods.

Patients with CGD may experience behavioral, emotional, and learning difficulties as a consequence of chronic disease, recurrent hospitalization, and limitations of activity. Older children and adolescents are especially likely to be non-compliant with respect to prophylaxis and risk avoidance, increasing their risk for CGD-related complications. The inflammatory bowel disease present in up to 50% of persons with X-linked CGD may result in discomfort and growth impairment, and may require colostomy or colectomy. Overall quality of life is reduced in children with CGD, whereas patients with CGD who have undergone transplant report quality of life comparable to healthy children [Cole et al 2013]. Thus, with improved outcomes HSCT presents an increasingly reasonable alternative and the possibility of a normal life.

As HSCT becomes safer, more reliable and more available it will likely be an early and initial choice for the management of CGD. Currently, many centers offer HSCT after the first life-threatening infection, but with advances in the technique, the availability of donors, especially for minority populations, and the availability of experienced centers, that equation and timing may change. Even without HSCT the majority of persons with CGD will live into adulthood. There is currently very little difference in overall survival over the first decades of life between medical and transplant management. However, the significant mortality in medical management begins to accrue after age 20 [Kuhns et al 2010]. Aggressive prophylaxis and infection management increase the likelihood of doing well.

The European Bone Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) Working Group 2011 statement [EBMT Working Group 2011] recommends allogeneic bone marrow transplantation for CGD in the case of unavailability of reliable specialist medical care, non-compliance with long-term antibiotic/antifungal prophylaxis, one or more life-threatening infections, severe granulomatous disease with progressive organ dysfunction (e.g., lung restriction), steroid-dependent granulomatous disease (e.g., colitis), or ongoing therapy-refractory infection (e.g., aspergillosis).
