Depending on their age, individuals with HHH syndrome should be maintained on a protein-restricted diet. For infants and children the dietary protein needs to be restricted to control hyperammonemia, but sufficient for normal growth and development.

Dietary supplementation with Cyclinex®-1 (infants and children) or Cyclinex®-2 (adult) formulas that provide only essential amino acids and other nutritional supplements have been helpful for some affected individuals.

Citrulline supplementation at 0.17 g/kg/day or 3.8 g/m2/day is preferred to arginine because citrulline accepts an aspartate (via the arginosuccinate synthase reaction) and therefore eliminates two amino groups per cycle. Moreover, there may be a possible association between arginine supplementation and progression of lower limb spasticity [HHH International Round Table, Roma 2006, unpublished].

Sodium phenylbutyrate (Buphenyl®) is given at 450-600 mg/kg/day in three divided doses. Sodium phenylbutyrate initially is imported into the mitochondria where it undergoes β-oxidation to produce phenylacetate.

Lysine supplementation is indicated when plasma lysine concentrations are low. Low plasma lysine concentrations have been associated with delayed growth and development.

Plasma concentrations of ammonia, glutamine, arginine, and essential amino acids should be maintained within the normal range. Note: (1) Although elevated plasma ornithine concentrations may decrease significantly if dietary management is followed, complete normalization of plasma ornithine concentration is rarely observed. (2) Even in the absence of hyperammonemic episodes, affected individuals may continue to develop neurologic complications such as spasticity or learning disabilities. Maintaining as low a level of plasma ornithine concentration as possible by restricting protein intake could help prevent some of the progressive neurologic complications seen in these individuals.

Liver transplantation is not indicated for persons with HHH syndrome. Because SLC25A15 and the ornithine degradation pathway are expressed in all tissues (i.e., brain, kidney) and most cell types (i.e., astrocytes, fibroblasts), liver transplantation may correct the hyperammonemia, but it will not correct tissue-specific metabolic abnormalities that also contribute to the neurologic pathology.

Three individuals with HHH syndrome who had acute fulminant hepatic failure and coagulopathy rapidly stabilized after protein restriction and arginine or citrulline supplementation [Fecarotta et al 2006, Mhanni et al 2008].
