CRIM Status

Although enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) should be initiated as soon as the diagnosis of IOPD or symptomatic Pompe disease is established, it may be appropriate to determine cross-reactive immunologic material (CRIM) status prior to initiating ERT, as individuals who do not produce cross-reactive immunologic material (i.e., who are CRIM-negative) generally develop high titer anti-rhGAA antibodies during ERT and require modified therapy protocols using immunomodulation early in the treatment course, optimally before the first infusion [Winchester et al 2008, Kishnani et al 2010, Messinger et al 2012]. Multiple immunomodulation protocols are in use, most of which use rituximab with additional drugs (including mycophenylate mofetil, methotrexate, and sirolimus) [Messinger et al 2012, Elder et al 2013].

Geographic areas in which CRIM-negative status is common include the US and the Middle East [Messinger et al 2012].

Two ways to determine the CRIM status of an individual with Pompe disease are:

Acid alpha-glucosidase protein quantitation performed by an antibody-based method in cultured fibroblasts;

Molecular genetic testing to determine if the pathogenic variants result in total absence of enzyme activity (i.e., are CRIM-negative) [Bali et al 2012].

Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT)

Myozyme® (alglucosidase alfa) was approved by the FDA in 2006 for IOPD infantile-onset Pompe disease.

Lumizyme® was approved by the FDA in 2010 for use in individuals older than age eight years with LOPD. Age restrictions on Lumizyme were removed in 2014.

Myozyme® and Lumizyme® are administered by slow IV infusion at 20-40 mg/kg/dose every two weeks. Many individuals are now treated with the higher dose.

Complications of ERT

Infusion-associated reactions. In clinical studies, infusion reactions were observed in half of those treated with Myozyme®.

The majority of treated children developed IgG antibodies to Myozyme® within the first three months of treatment. Infusion reactions appear to be more common in individuals with IgG antibodies. Some affected individuals with high sustained IgG titers may have a poor clinical response to treatment (see Establishing the Diagnosis, Acid alpha-glucosidase protein quantitation).

Development of IgE antibodies is less common but may be associated with anaphylaxis requiring life support measures.

Most infusion-associated reactions can be modified by slowing the rate of infusion or administration of antipyretics, antihistamines, or glucocorticoids. For these reasons – and because many individuals with IOPD have preexisting compromise of respiratory and cardiac function – initiation of therapy in centers equipped to provide emergency care is recommended.

Other. Children with IOPD may have difficulty with anesthesia for procedures related to placement of devices for venous access.

Prognosis

IOPD. The rationale for newborn screening (NBS) is that cardiac status and motor development in infants with IOPD treated early with enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) are better than in controls [Chien et al 2009]; initiation of ERT before age two weeks is associated with significantly improved gross motor function at age 12 months [Yang et al 2016]. Long-term follow-up data are not yet available on this cohort.

In those in whom ERT was initiated before age six months and before the need for ventilatory assistance, a majority had improved survival, improved ventilator-independent survival, reduced cardiac mass, and significantly improved acquisition of motor skills compared to an untreated cohort.

Longer-term survivors who underwent early ERT may show sustained improvement in cardiac and motor function [Prater et al 2012]. ERT reduces cardiac mass to varying degrees and improves the ejection fraction, although there may be a transient decrease in the ejection fraction after the first several weeks of ERT [Levine et al 2008]. ERT results in an increase of the PR interval and a decrease in the left ventricular voltage [Ansong et al 2006].

While the long-term prognosis is as yet unknown, available studies suggest better cognitive outcomes than had been predicted. Of note, assessment of cognitive abilities is difficult in children younger than age five years with IOPD; typical assessment tools frequently underestimate the cognitive abilities of these children [Kishnani et al 2009, Nicolino et al 2009, Ebbink et al 2012]. Estimates of cognitive abilities at age 24 months using the Bayley scales showed preservation of cognitive abilities in infants ascertained by NBS and treated early with ERT [Lai et al 2016].

Pivotal trials of ERT on IOPD show convincing delay in the onset of dependence on ventilator support, but most patients who are ventilator dependent remain so . This finding is consistent with experimental evidence demonstrating relative resistance of skeletal muscle (especially type II fibers) to effective glycogen depletion with administered alpha glucosidase. Predictors of a poor response to ERT include increase in muscle glycogen during therapy, high IgG titers to alpha glucosidase, and CRIM negativity.

LOPD. The major morbidities are motor disability and respiratory insufficiency. In a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study of 90 affected individuals age eight years and older who were ambulatory and free of invasive ventilatory support at baseline, those receiving the active agent had better preservation of motor function and forced vital capacity at the 78th week evaluation point [van der Ploeg et al 2010]. Similar findings were demonstrated in an open-label trial [Strothotte et al 2010].

Quality of life, assessed with the Rand Corporation 36-Item Short Form Survey Instrument (SF-36), had declined in adults with LOPD before initiation of ERT and improved in the first two years of ERT [Güngör et al 2016].

Note: Although the timing of initiation of ERT in infants predicted to have LOPD who have been ascertained by newborn screening is not well established, the Taiwan group uses clinical severity to identify those for whom ERT is warranted before age three years [Chien et al 2015].
