To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with nail-patella syndrome (NPS), the following evaluations are recommended:

Blood pressure measurement and urinalysis to screen for renal disease, plus a urine albumin:creatinine ratio on a first-morning urine. The latter is a more sensitive measure of renal disease than urinalysis as it corrects for urine concentration. If any abnormalities are detected, the individual should then be referred to a nephrologist.

Screening for glaucoma as soon as a child is able to cooperate with the examination. The examination should include measurement of intraocular pressure, examination of the optic disc, and assessment of visual fields in order to detect normal pressure glaucoma. If any abnormalities are detected, individuals should be referred to an ophthalmologist. Any infant or young child found to have an abnormal or absent red reflex on eye examination by a primary care physician should be referred to an ophthalmologist immediately.

History and physical examination to detect orthopedic problems

History to identify gastrointestinal, neurologic, or vasomotor abnormalities

Before surgery or intensive physiotherapy for orthopedic complaints, investigation via MRI for possible bone/soft tissue anatomic abnormalities

History and examination to detect dental anomalies

Consideration of formal quantification of bone mineral density (BMD) via dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) as indicator of fracture propensity based on reported low BMD and increased fracture risk in NPS

DEXA norms are readily available in most clinical settings for adults and may be pursued in all young adults (age >18 years) at least once.

Pediatric DEXA norms are often less readily available, but may be obtained via local pediatric endocrinologist or machine manufacturer. No formal recommendations for DEXA scanning of pediatric patients exist at this time, but DEXA should be pursued if fractures or unexplained skeletal pain occurs with additional clinical evaluation.

Medical genetics consultation
