To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), hypermobility type, the following evaluations are recommended:

Thorough history and physical examination, especially for musculoskeletal, skin, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and oral/dental manifestations

Assessment of prior experience with mechanical, pharmacologic, and/or surgical treatment of pain and joint instability, as well as current degree of pain and disability

Baseline echocardiogram to evaluate aortic root diameter, as adjusted for age and body surface area [Campens et al 2014]. Significant aortic enlargement and/or other cardiac abnormalities should prompt consideration of alternative diagnoses.

The following evaluations should not be routine, but may be appropriate in some situations:

For individuals with significant orthostatic intolerance and/or tachycardia, consider tilt-table testing to help confirm postural orthostatic tachycardia and/or neurally mediated hypotension. However, treatment of the symptoms may not differ based on the outcome, so tilt-table testing is optional. It is also sometimes appropriate to rule out adrenocortical insufficiency.

If irritable bowel syndrome is suspected, consider formal gastroenterology consultation and possible endoscopy to rule out other treatable diagnoses. Celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, and other causes of malabsorption or bowel dysfunction are not associated with EDS, but may be coexisting diagnoses.

Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) is appropriate at any age if height loss greater than one inch is documented or x-rays are suggestive of osteopenia. Screening DEXA in those without suggestive signs or symptoms is not currently recommended.

If a history of severe or prolonged bleeding is present, consider hematologic evaluation for von Willebrand disease, thrombocytopenia, or other bleeding diathesis. Although pathophysiologically unrelated, these conditions may coexist with hypermobility type EDS and exacerbate the hematologic manifestations.

For individuals with significant pain and/or fatigue, screen for and correction of other potential causes, including (but not limited to) vitamin D deficiency, vitamin B12 deficiency, folate deficiency, iron deficiency, celiac disease, or hypothyroidism.

When needed, the pain management recommendations below can be implemented by any member of the care team who feels confident enough to do so, or evaluation by a pain management specialist could be considered.

If there is suspicion of Chiari malformation, consider cerebral MRI, possibly with CSF flow studies.

Clinical genetics consultation is appropriate if there is uncertainty about the diagnosis or for assistance in evaluation and management.
