To establish the extent of disease and needs in an individual diagnosed with dyskeratosis congenita (DC), it is important to note that the clinical spectrum of DC is broad and signs and symptoms develop at various ages and rates. Suggested studies to consider include:

Dermatologic. Thorough skin and nail examination

Growth and development evaluation

Ophthalmic. Thorough examination for complications related to lacrimal duct stenosis, abnormal eyelash growth, and retinal disorders including exudative retinopathy

Dental. Baseline evaluation for oral hygiene, leukoplakia, and oral squamous cell cancer

Otolaryngology. Baseline evaluation for leukoplakia and squamous cell head/neck cancer

Gastrointestinal and hepatic. History of potential swallowing difficulties and/or enteropathy; baseline liver function tests

Genitourinary. For males, assessment for urethral stenosis

Musculoskeletal. Consideration of baseline bone mineral density scan; history of any joint problems

Neurologic. If early-onset neurologic findings (e.g., ataxia) or many of the complications listed above are present, consideration of brain MRI to evaluate for cerebellar hypoplasia or intracranial calcifications

Hematologic

Evaluation by a hematologist to determine if signs of bone marrow failure are present. Evaluation may include complete blood count and bone marrow aspiration and biopsy.

Consideration of HLA typing of the affected individual, unaffected sibs, and parents in anticipation of possible need for hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT)

Pulmonary

Baseline pulmonary function tests (PFTs) including carbon monoxide diffusion capacity

Consideration of bubble echocardiography to evaluate for pulmonary arteriovenous malformations

Evaluation by a pulmonologist if the individual is symptomatic or PFTs are abnormal

Increased risk of cancer

Evaluation by an otolaryngologist and dentist as soon as the individual is able to cooperate with the examination

Gynecologic examination for females starting by age 16 years or when sexually active

Consultation with a clinical geneticist and/or genetic counselor
