There are currently no well-established surveillance guidelines for individuals with a CDC73 pathogenic variant. Based on an extensive literature review, the authors make the following management recommendations:

Measure serum concentrations of calcium, iPTH, and 25-(OH) vitamin D (to evaluate for possible coexisting vitamin D deficiency as a cause of elevated iPTH levels or unexpectedly “normal” calcium concentrations) every 12 months starting at age five to ten years.

In patients with a history of parathyroid carcinoma who develop a rise in calcium levels, consider the possibility of a new primary parathyroid tumor in addition to recurrence/progression of malignant disease.

Consider periodic parathyroid ultrasound examination for the detection of non-functioning parathyroid carcinoma, which has developed on rare occasion in individuals with a CDC73 pathogenic variant [Guarnieri et al 2006].

Obtain panoramic x-ray dental imaging with neck shielding at least every five years, in addition to regular dental hygiene maintenance, starting at age ten years. Dental providers should be notified of the presence of a CDC73-related disorder and the need for monitoring for osseous fibromas of the maxilla and mandible.

Monitor for kidney lesions by renal ultrasound examination at least every five years starting at the age of diagnosis. Serum creatinine concentrations should be monitored in those individuals with renal cysts. Individuals with solid lesions should be referred for appropriate subspecialty care.

Starting at reproductive age, women with a CDC73-related disorder should undergo regular gynecologic care (including pelvic examination). Care providers in obstetrics and gynecology should be notified of the risk of uterine tumors. Pelvic ultrasound examination should be obtained in any woman with a menstrual disorder (particularly abnormal uterine bleeding or menorrhagia) with further imaging studies (CT or MRI) as clinically indicated.

The age at which genetic testing and surveillance should begin for at-risk relatives is also not well established.

The authors recommend considering testing and surveillance for primary hyperparathyroidism and jaw tumors beginning at around age five to ten years, as this is the age of the youngest reported case of hyperparathyroidism and is ten years younger than the earliest reported age of parathyroid carcinoma diagnosis.

The age at onset of kidney lesions is not well described; renal ultrasound examination can be considered at time of diagnosis.

Uterine tumors have only been reported in adults; surveillance can begin at reproductive age.
