No guidelines regarding initial screening evaluations or surveillance of persons with a germline DICER1 pathogenic variant have been established. Based on data from the International PPB Registry (IPPBR) which includes more than 500 persons with symptomatic or asymptomatic DICER1-related disorders, the authors recommend (1) annual physical examination and targeted review of systems, and (2) imaging study type and frequency based on tumor type, patient age, and suspicious clinical findings.

PPB. Baseline chest CT to evaluate for lung cysts or tumors in a patient of any age

Note: The most critical age group for chest CT is children under age three years, the peak risk age for solid PPB. The negative predictive value of a normal chest CT for development of PPB is not known.

CN

Baseline kidney CT or ultrasound examination in a patient diagnosed with PPB

In a patient of any age, especially those younger than age four years, annual abdominal examination and monitoring for abdominal pain, swelling, or hematuriaNote: The negative predictive value of a normal kidney CT or ultrasound examination for development of CN is not known.

Thyroid gland neoplasia

Thyroid physical examination in a patient of any age

If thyroid gland asymmetry and/or a nodule are detected, perform thyroid ultrasound examination to confirm as well as to determine if surveillance or fine needle aspiration biopsy is warranted.

If no nodules are detected, continue annual physical examination and consider repeat thyroid US every three to five years.

Thyroid ultrasound examination if the patient has previously received chemotherapy or as a baseline if chemotherapy is anticipated

Thyroid function testing as indicated based on clinical signs and symptoms of hypo- or hyperthyroidism

Ovarian stromal tumors

Examination of all females of any age for signs and symptoms of precocious puberty or virilization, and masses in the abdomen or pelvis. If any are detected, perform appropriate imaging and laboratory evaluations.

Imaging: abdominal-pelvic US examination, MRI, or CT

Laboratory testing: serum markers AFP, beta-HCG, LDH, inhibin A and B, estradiol, testosterone, CA125, and serum electrolytes including calciumNote: There is no current recommendation for laboratory screening in the absence of a mass or clinical findings of sex hormone excess.

For women and the parents of young girls with a DICER1 germline pathogenic variant: education regarding the possible presenting signs and symptoms of ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors (abdominal distension, precocious puberty, amenorrhea, and signs of virilization [hirsutism, voice changes, acne])

CBME

Evaluation of young children for ciliary body medulloepithelioma including measurement of visual acuity

Visual inspection of the eye and orbit

Botryoid ERMS. In infants, children, and young adults: when signs/symptoms of hematuria or abnormal vaginal bleeding are present, endoscopic evaluation of the bladder or direct visualization of the cervix, respectively

NCMH. In infants, children, adolescents, and adults:

Review of systems including respiratory and feeding difficulties, rhinorrhea, epistaxis, visual disturbances, and otitis media

Nasal endoscopy as warranted by ophthalmologic signs (e.g., ophthalmoplegia, proptosis, ptosis, hypotropia, and enophthalmos) resulting from orbital involvement of the tumor

Pituitary blastoma. Brain MRI for persons with a DICER1 germline pathogenic variant with signs of cortisol excess

Pineoblastoma. Brain MRI for persons with a DICER1 germline pathogenic variant with signs of increased intracranial pressure such as headache, full fontanel, vomiting, and lethargy, or other neurologic defects including upgaze paralysis and nystagmus
