Fibrous Dysplasia

Individuals with craniofacial FD should have yearly vision and hearing evaluations, and periodic computed tomography of the skull.

Individuals with spine FD should be monitored closely for progressive scoliosis.

Radiographs should be performed periodically to evaluate new or worsening symptoms and to provide additional information about FD anatomy and bone quality.

Phosphorus levels should be checked periodically to monitor for the development of FGF23-mediated hypophosphatemia.

25-hydroxyvitamin D levels should be checked periodically as part of routine bone health surveillance.

Endocrinopathies

Precocious puberty. All children should be monitored for growth acceleration and other clinical signs of precocious puberty.

Thyroid

Thyroid function tests should be monitored routinely in all children younger than age five years. See Thyroid Evaluation.

Individuals with abnormalities on ultrasound examination but normal thyroid function tests should continue to have laboratory testing periodically throughout childhood, as the development of frank hyperthyroidism may occur later. See Thyroid Evaluation.

Patients who retain abnormal thyroid tissue following thyroid surgery should be monitored with regular physical examination and periodic thyroid ultrasound examination because of the potential for thyroid tissue regrowth.

Testicular lesions likely have low potential for malignant transformation [Boyce et al 2012]; however, it is prudent to monitor all males with regular physical examinations and testicular ultrasound examinations. See Gonadal Involvement Management in Boys.

Growth hormone excess. See Growth Hormone Excess Evaluation:

All children should be monitored for growth acceleration.

Patients treated medically with octreotide should be monitored for gallbladder disease, and with those treated with pegvisomant should be monitored for hepatotoxicity.

FGF23-mediated phosphate wasting. Serum phosphorus levels should be monitored routinely in all patients.

Hypercortisolism

Routine biochemical surveillance is not indicated; however, all infants should be monitored for clinical signs of hypercortisolism.

Patients with a history of Cushing syndrome that has spontaneously resolved should be monitored for late-appearing adrenal insufficiency.

Other

GI. See Gastrointestinal Management (pdf).
