MCAP syndrome. Provisional surveillance guidelines include regular follow up, no less than every six months until age six years, and at least yearly thereafter. At each visit, the following are recommended with appropriate testing for any positive finding:

A medical history with attention to:

Childhood cancer

Breathing or sleep problems

Seizures or other undefined spells, headaches, or new or worsening neurologic symptoms

A detailed neurologic evaluation

Brain MRI. Based on limited retrospective data available, the risk for hydrocephalus, cerebellar tonsillar ectopia, or both with low brain stem or high spinal cord compression, appears to be highest in the first two years. Brain MRI is provisionally recommended every six months from birth to age two years, and annually from age two to six years. In older individuals, the frequency should be based on prior results and clinical findings, with particular attention to apnea or other abnormal patterns of respiration, headaches, changes in gait, or other neurologic problems.

Renal ultrasound. Until additional data are available, screening for Wilms tumor following guidelines developed for Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome may be considered (i.e., renal ultrasound examination every 3 months until age 8 years).

CLOVES syndrome

Given the associated morbidities including severe scoliosis, infiltrative lipomatous overgrowth, paraspinal high-flow lesions with spinal cord ischemia, lymphatic malformations, cutaneous vesicles, orthopedic problems, central phlebectasias and thromboembolism, individuals with CLOVES syndrome require surveillance tailored to their specific needs with particular attention to surgical care [Sapp et al 2007, Alomari 2011, Alomari et al 2011].

Commonly occurring postoperative complications of surgical excision of the truncal lipomatous mass include recurrence, hypervascularity, and infiltrative growth. Therefore, diligent surgical care and monitoring are recommended.

Fibroadipose hyperplasia. Data regarding the natural history of fibroadipose hyperplasia are limited. However, given the extensive degree of somatic overgrowth in most individuals, the same surveillance guidelines for CLOVES are tentatively recommended for individuals with FH [Lindhurst et al 2012].
