General health should be closely followed. Decreased growth rate should be investigated as it is less likely to be the result of PH than of other associated problems, such as reduced renal function.

Extrapolating from studies in persons with cirrhosis, individuals with CHF should be screened for esophageal varices particularly when the platelet count decreases significantly over time or prior to interventions such as renal transplantation [Garcia-Tsao et al 2007, Bosch et al 2008]. Screening is controversial in children and should only be undertaken if a therapeutic intervention (e.g., beta-blocker therapy, variceal banding) is being considered.

Small varices warrant a repeat esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy (EGD) in a year.

If no varices are identified when EGD is performed because of a decline in platelet count, EGD should be repeated every two to three years.

Screening for hepatopulmonary syndrome is achieved by measuring upright oxygen saturation; screening for portopulmonary hypertension is performed with echocardiogram to estimate pulmonary artery pressure [Whitworth & Sokol 2005] in the presence of sustained platelet decrease and/or prior to an intervention.

Imaging allows:

Assessment of spleen size to indirectly follow PH;

Visualization of bile duct abnormalities (e.g. cysts in the liver) that could identify individuals at greater risk for cholangitis, bile duct stones, and cholangiocarcinoma.

The appropriate frequency of surveillance imaging is not well defined, and depends on disease severity. For individuals with mild disease, ultrasound examination every two years would be adequate; for those with more severe disease, an annual ultrasound examination could enable adequate monitoring of disease progression.

Note: No data on surveillance for cholangiocarcinoma or hepatocellular carcinoma in this setting are available. However, the incidence in children is thought to be extremely rare (see Definition, Clinical Manifestations of Congenital Hepatic Fibrosis).
