The following routine monitoring is recommended for individuals with TSC (adapted from Krueger et al [2013a], Table 3):

Central nervous system

Obtain MRI of brain every one to three years in asymptomatic (no symptoms referable to the central nervous system) individuals with TSC younger than age 25 years to monitor for new occurrence of subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA). Those with asymptomatic SEGA in childhood should continue to be imaged periodically as adults to ensure that there is no growth.

In affected individuals with large or growing SEGA causing ventricular enlargement who are still asymptomatic, brain MRI scans should be performed more frequently and these individuals and their families should be educated regarding the potential for new symptoms.

Perform screening for TAND features at least annually. Perform comprehensive formal evaluation for TAND at key developmental points: infancy (0-3 years), preschool (3-6 years), pre-middle school (6-9 years), adolescence (12-16 years), early adulthood (18-25 years), and as needed thereafter.

Obtain routine EEG in individuals with known or suspected seizure activity. The frequency of routine EEG should be determined by clinical need.

Renal

Obtain MRI of the abdomen to assess for progression of angiomyolipomas and renal cystic disease every one to three years throughout the lifetime of the affected individual.

Assess renal function (including determination of GFR) and blood pressure at least annually.

Cardiac. In asymptomatic infants and children with documented cardiac rhabdomyomas, obtain an echocardiogram every one to three years until regression of the cardiac rhabdomyomas is documented. More frequent or advanced diagnostic assessment may be required for symptomatic individuals.

Pulmonary

Perform clinical screening (targeted history) for LAM symptoms, including exertional dyspnea and shortness of breath, at each clinic visit for women older than age 18 years or those who report respiratory symptoms. Counseling regarding smoking risk and estrogen use should be reviewed at each clinic visit for individuals at risk for LAM.

Obtain a high-resolution computed tomography (HCRT) of the lungs every five to ten years in asymptomatic individuals at risk for LAM who have no evidence of lung cysts on baseline HRCT. Individuals with lung cysts detected on HRCT should have annual pulmonary function testing (pulmonary function test and 6-min walk) and HRCT reduced to every two to three years.

Skin. Perform detailed clinical dermatologic inspection/exam annually.

Dental. Perform detailed clinical dental inspection/exam at minimum every six months and panoramic radiographs by age seven years, if not performed previously.

Ophthalmologic. Perform annual ophthalmologic evaluation in affected individuals with previously identified ophthalmologic lesions or vision symptoms at the baseline evaluation.
