Standards of care have been reviewed recently [Wang et al 2010] (full text).

Early-onset LAMA2 MD

At least biannual evaluations during the first five years by a nutritionist and gastroenterologist to monitor weight gain and to identify early recurrent aspiration

At least annual follow up with a pulmonologist to assess respiratory function. After age four to six years: annual pulmonary function testing including assessment of forced vital capacity (FVC).

Annual measurement of FVC to allow trending of FVC

Annual evaluation of strength and joint range of motion by a physical therapist

At least annual evaluation of the spine by an orthopedist. Note: (1) More frequent evaluations are warranted during periods of rapid growth, loss of function, and/or progression of deformities. (2) Annual lateral spinal x-rays (in addition to the standard anterior-posterior x-rays) can be used to evaluate the anterior posterior intra-thoracic cavity diameter; however, if respiratory function declines rapidly without known cause or without prior spinal surgery, a CT may be needed.

Cardiac monitoring:

In the absence of symptoms, evaluation by a cardiologist including electrocardiogram and echocardiogram at age five years, ten years, and then every two years

In patients with severe respiratory insufficiency on mechanical ventilation, annual echocardiography (required)

In patients reporting palpitations, increased fatigue, or loss of consciousness without a clear neurologic origin, cardiac evaluation including Holter monitor and echocardiogram (recommended)

Pre-surgical cardiac evaluation including Holter monitor, echocardiogram, and a dopamine test of cardiac function

Note: The brain MRI findings seen in both complete and partial laminin α2 deficiency do not need to be followed with serial scans over time [Geranmayeh et al 2010].

Late-onset LAMA2 MD

Respiratory. Monitor for respiratory insufficiency with serial pulmonary function tests.

Orthopedic. Monitor with frequent spinal examinations to detect scoliosis and assess bone health.

Neurologic. Monitor to detect and treat seizures.
